.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Anthropic, PBC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CLAUDE-CODE-SETTINGS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm claude-code-settings
.Nd configuration files for Claude Code
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr claude-code 1
reads configuration from multiple JSON files at different scopes.
Settings from higher-precedence sources override lower ones.
Array values are merged across scopes rather than replaced.
.Sh FILE LOCATIONS AND PRECEDENCE
Settings are loaded in the following order, from lowest to highest
precedence:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Sy User settings
.Pp
.Pa ~/.claude/settings.json
.Pp
Applies to all projects for the current user.
.It
.Sy Project settings
.Pp
.Pa .claude/settings.json
.Pp
Relative to the project root
.Pq typically the git repository root .
Checked into version control and shared with collaborators.
.It
.Sy Local project settings
.Pp
.Pa .claude/settings.local.json
.Pp
Same directory as project settings.
Not checked into version control.
Overrides project settings for the local machine.
.It
.Sy CLI settings
.Pp
Passed via the
.Fl -settings
flag on the command line.
Overrides all file-based settings.
.It
.Sy Managed settings
.Pp
Enterprise-managed settings that take highest precedence.
Location is platform-dependent:
.Bl -tag -width "Windows" -compact
.It macOS
.Pa /Library/Application Support/ClaudeCode/managed-settings.json
.It Linux
.Pa /etc/claude-code/managed-settings.json
.It Windows
.Pa %PROGRAMDATA%\eClaudeCode\emanaged-settings.json
.El
.El
.Sh SETTINGS REFERENCE
.Ss Permissions
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm permissions.allow
Array of glob patterns for tools that are allowed without prompting.
Patterns match tool names
.Pq e.g., Qq Read , Qq mcp__moxy__* .
.It Cm permissions.deny
Array of glob patterns for tools that are always denied.
Takes precedence over
.Cm permissions.allow .
.It Cm permissions.defaultMode
Default permission mode for sessions.
One of:
.Cm default ,
.Cm acceptEdits ,
.Cm plan ,
.Cm auto ,
.Cm dontAsk ,
.Cm bypassPermissions .
See
.Xr claude-code 1
for descriptions of each mode.
.El
.Ss Hooks
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm hooks
Object mapping event names to arrays of handler objects.
See
.Xr claude-code-hooks 5
for the full hook system reference.
.El
.Ss Environment
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm env
Object of key-value pairs injected into the environment for all tool
invocations during a session.
Values are strings.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "env": {
    "GOFLAGS": "-tags=integration",
    "NODE_ENV": "development"
  }
}
.Ed
.El
.Ss Model
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm model
Default model to use.
Can be a shorthand
.Pq Cm sonnet , Cm opus
or a fully-qualified model identifier.
.It Cm effortLevel
Default reasoning effort level.
One of:
.Cm low ,
.Cm medium ,
.Cm high ,
.Cm max .
.El
.Ss Language and Localization
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm language
Set the language for Claude's responses.
Accepts language names in English
.Pq e.g., Qq Japanese , Qq Spanish
or IETF language tags.
.El
.Ss Sandbox
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm sandbox.enableSeatbelt
.Pq macOS only
Enable the macOS seatbelt sandbox for tool processes.
Restricts filesystem and network access.
.It Cm sandbox.enableDocker
.Pq Linux only
Enable Docker-based sandboxing for tool processes.
.It Cm sandbox.permissions
Additional sandbox permission descriptors.
.El
.Ss Plugins
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm enabledPlugins
Array of plugin identifiers that should be loaded at session start.
Each entry is a string matching the plugin's
.Cm name
field from its manifest.
.It Cm extraKnownMarketplaces
Array of marketplace objects
.Pq with Cm name No and Cm url No fields
to search for plugins beyond the default marketplace.
.El
.Ss Auto-Updates
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm autoUpdatesChannel
The release channel for automatic updates.
One of:
.Cm stable ,
.Cm beta ,
.Cm disabled .
.El
.Ss Miscellaneous
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm disableAllHooks
Boolean.
When true, no hooks fire during sessions.
Useful for debugging.
.It Cm includeGitInstructions
Boolean.
When true
.Pq default ,
include git-related context in the system prompt.
.It Cm attribution.commit
Boolean.
When true, append a
.Qq Generated by Claude Code
line to commit messages.
.It Cm attribution.pr
Boolean.
When true, append attribution to pull request descriptions.
.El
.Ss Worktree
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm worktree.symlinkDirectories
Array of directory paths
.Pq relative to the repo root
that should be symlinked into worktrees rather than copied.
Useful for large directories like
.Pa node_modules
or
.Pa .direnv .
.It Cm worktree.sparsePaths
Array of path patterns for sparse checkout in worktrees.
Only matching paths are checked out, reducing disk usage and
initialization time.
.El
.Sh ARRAY MERGING
Array-valued settings are merged across scopes rather than replaced.
For example, if user settings define:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{ "permissions.allow": ["Read"] }
.Ed
.Pp
and project settings define:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{ "permissions.allow": ["Grep"] }
.Ed
.Pp
the effective value is
.Qq ["Read", "Grep"] .
.Pp
To remove an entry inherited from a lower scope, add it to the
corresponding deny list rather than attempting to override the allow
list.
.Sh GLOBAL CONFIGURATION
The file
.Pa ~/.claude.json
stores global preferences that are not part of the settings hierarchy.
These control UI behavior and editor integration.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm editorMode
Boolean.
When true, optimize the UI for embedding inside an editor or IDE.
.It Cm autoConnectIde
Boolean.
When true, automatically connect to a running IDE instance
.Pq e.g., VS Code
on session start.
.It Cm showTurnDuration
Boolean.
When true, display the elapsed time for each assistant turn.
.It Cm teammateMode
Default teammate mode for subagent spawning.
One of:
.Cm auto ,
.Cm in-process ,
.Cm tmux .
.El
.Sh PLUGIN MANIFEST
Plugins are defined by a
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json
manifest file in the plugin root directory.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "name": "my-plugin",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Example plugin",
  "skills": ["skills/*.md"],
  "commands": ["commands/*.md"],
  "agents": ["agents/*.md"],
  "hooks": {
    "PreToolUse": [
      {
        "type": "command",
        "command": "bin/check-tool"
      }
    ]
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Manifest fields:
.Bl -tag -width "description"
.It Cm name
Unique identifier for the plugin.
.It Cm version
Semantic version string.
.It Cm description
Human-readable description.
.It Cm skills
Array of glob patterns matching skill definition files.
.It Cm commands
Array of glob patterns matching command definition files.
.It Cm agents
Array of glob patterns matching agent definition files.
.It Cm hooks
Hook handlers provided by the plugin.
Same schema as the settings
.Cm hooks
key.
.El
.Sh PLUGIN DIRECTORY LAYOUT
A plugin directory may contain:
.Bl -tag -width "settings.json"
.It Pa skills/
Skill definition files
.Pq Markdown .
.It Pa commands/
Command definition files
.Pq Markdown .
.It Pa agents/
Agent definition files
.Pq Markdown .
.It Pa hooks/
Hook handler scripts.
.It Pa .mcp.json
MCP server configuration provided by the plugin.
.It Pa .lsp.json
LSP server configuration provided by the plugin.
.It Pa bin/
Executable scripts and binaries used by hooks and commands.
.It Pa settings.json
Default settings provided by the plugin.
Merged at lower precedence than user settings.
.El
.Sh MCP SERVER CONFIGURATION
MCP servers are configured in
.Pa .mcp.json
files.
The file contains a
.Cm mcpServers
object mapping server names to configuration objects.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "my-server": {
      "command": "/usr/local/bin/my-mcp-server",
      "args": ["--port", "0"],
      "env": {
        "API_KEY": "..."
      }
    }
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa .mcp.json
files are searched for in:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
The current working directory
.It
The project root
.It
The user's home directory
.Pq Pa ~/.mcp.json
.El
.Pp
Server configuration fields:
.Bl -tag -width "command"
.It Cm command
Path to the server executable.
.It Cm args
Array of command-line arguments.
.It Cm env
Object of environment variables to set for the server process.
.It Cm url
.Pq alternative to Cm command
URL for HTTP-based MCP transport
.Pq SSE or Streamable HTTP .
.It Cm scope
One of
.Cm project
or
.Cm user .
Controls where the server configuration is stored when added via
.Cm claude mcp add .
.El
.Pp
Supported transport types:
.Bl -tag -width "streamable-http" -compact
.It Cm stdio
Server communicates via stdin/stdout
.Pq default .
.It Cm sse
Server-Sent Events over HTTP.
.It Cm streamable-http
Bidirectional HTTP streaming.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.claude/settings.json
User-level settings.
.It Pa .claude/settings.json
Project-level settings.
.It Pa .claude/settings.local.json
Local project settings
.Pq not version-controlled .
.It Pa ~/.claude.json
Global UI and editor preferences.
.It Pa .mcp.json
MCP server configuration.
.It Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json
Plugin manifest.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr claude-code-hooks 5 ,
.Xr claude-code-env 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Anthropic , PBC
