.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Anthropic, PBC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CLAUDE-CODE-HOOKS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm claude-code-hooks
.Nd hook system for Claude Code lifecycle events
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Hooks allow external programs and services to observe and intercept
events during a
.Xr claude-code 1
session.
They are configured in settings files
.Pq see Xr claude-code-settings 5
under the
.Cm hooks
key.
.Pp
Each hook is an array of handler objects keyed by event name.
When an event fires, all matching handlers execute in order.
Handlers can observe events passively, modify inputs, or control
permission decisions.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Hooks are configured in any settings file
.Pq user, project, local, or managed
under the top-level
.Cm hooks
object.
The key is the event name and the value is an array of handler objects.
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "hooks": {
    "PreToolUse": [
      {
        "type": "command",
        "command": "/usr/local/bin/audit-tool-use"
      }
    ],
    "SessionStart": [
      {
        "type": "command",
        "command": "echo session started >> /tmp/claude.log"
      }
    ]
  }
}
.Ed
.Sh HANDLER TYPES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm command
Execute a shell command.
The event payload is passed as a JSON object on stdin.
The handler's behavior is determined by its exit code:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Li 0
Success.
If the handler writes JSON to stdout, it is interpreted as the
handler's response
.Pq e.g., permission decisions or input rewrites .
.It Li 2
Explicit block.
For permission-related events, this denies the action.
For other events, the session continues but the event is marked as
blocked.
.It Li other
Error.
The hook failure is logged.
Behavior depends on the event type: some events treat hook errors as
non-fatal, others may abort the action.
.El
.It Cm http
Send the event payload as an HTTP POST request to a URL.
The response body is interpreted as the handler's response.
HTTP errors are treated as hook failures.
.It Cm prompt
Display a prompt to the user with information from the event.
Used for notification and confirmation workflows.
.It Cm agent
Invoke a named agent to process the event.
The agent receives the event payload as context and its response is
used as the handler's output.
.El
.Sh HOOK EVENTS
Events are grouped by their firing cadence.
.Ss Per-Session Events
These events fire once per session lifecycle.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm SessionStart
Fires when a new session begins or an existing session is resumed.
Use for initialization, logging, or environment setup.
.It Cm SessionEnd
Fires when a session terminates, whether by user action, turn limits,
budget exhaustion, or error.
Use for cleanup, reporting, or archival.
.El
.Ss Per-Turn Events
These events fire once per assistant turn.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm UserPromptSubmit
Fires when the user submits a prompt, before it is sent to the model.
The handler receives the prompt text and may rewrite it via
.Cm updatedInput
in its response.
.It Cm Stop
Fires when the assistant completes a turn normally.
Use for turn-level logging or post-processing.
.It Cm StopFailure
Fires when the assistant turn ends due to an error
.Pq API failure, context overflow, etc .
.El
.Ss Per-Tool Events
These events fire for each tool invocation.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm PreToolUse
Fires before a tool is executed.
The handler receives the tool name and input.
It may return a
.Cm permissionDecision
to control whether the tool runs, or an
.Cm updatedInput
to modify the tool's arguments.
See
.Sx PERMISSION DECISIONS
below.
.It Cm PostToolUse
Fires after a tool completes successfully.
The handler receives the tool name, input, and output.
.It Cm PostToolUseFailure
Fires after a tool invocation fails.
The handler receives the tool name, input, and error details.
.It Cm PermissionRequest
Fires when a tool invocation triggers a permission prompt.
Allows hooks to intercept permission prompts before they reach the user.
.It Cm PermissionDenied
Fires when a tool invocation is denied, whether by the user, a hook, or
a permission rule.
Use for audit logging.
.El
.Ss Async Events
These events fire asynchronously in response to various system changes.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm WorktreeCreate
Fires when a git worktree is created for a session.
Receives the worktree path.
.It Cm WorktreeRemove
Fires when a git worktree is removed at session end or by user request.
.It Cm Notification
Fires when Claude generates a notification for the user
.Pq e.g., task completion, errors .
.It Cm ConfigChange
Fires when a settings file is modified during a session.
.It Cm InstructionsLoaded
Fires when CLAUDE.md files are loaded or reloaded.
.It Cm CwdChanged
Fires when the working directory changes during a session.
.It Cm FileChanged
Fires when a file in the working tree is modified by Claude.
.It Cm SubagentStart
Fires when a subagent is spawned.
.It Cm SubagentStop
Fires when a subagent terminates.
.It Cm TaskCreated
Fires when a background task is created.
.It Cm TaskCompleted
Fires when a background task finishes.
.It Cm TeammateIdle
Fires when a teammate agent becomes idle and is waiting for work.
.It Cm PreCompact
Fires before conversation context is compacted
.Pq summarized to reduce token usage .
.It Cm PostCompact
Fires after conversation context compaction completes.
.It Cm Elicitation
Fires when Claude requests additional information from the user via a
structured elicitation.
.It Cm ElicitationResult
Fires when the user responds to an elicitation.
.El
.Sh COMMON INPUT FIELDS
All hook events receive a JSON object on stdin with at least these
fields:
.Bl -tag -width "hook_event_name"
.It Cm session_id
The unique identifier for the current session.
.It Cm transcript_path
Filesystem path to the session's JSONL transcript file.
.It Cm cwd
The current working directory of the session.
.It Cm permission_mode
The active permission mode
.Pq e.g., Cm default , Cm auto , Cm plan .
.It Cm hook_event_name
The name of the event that triggered this hook.
.El
.Pp
Tool-related events additionally include:
.Bl -tag -width "tool_input"
.It Cm tool_name
The name of the tool being invoked.
.It Cm tool_input
The JSON input object passed to the tool.
.It Cm tool_output
.Pq PostToolUse only
The tool's output.
.It Cm error
.Pq PostToolUseFailure only
The error message or object.
.El
.Sh SPECIAL ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Hooks inherit the session's environment plus these additional variables:
.Bl -tag -width "CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT"
.It Ev CLAUDE_PROJECT_DIR
The root directory of the detected project
.Pq typically the git repository root .
.It Ev CLAUDE_ENV_FILE
Path to a file where hooks can write
.Ar KEY=VALUE
pairs to inject environment variables into subsequent tool invocations.
.It Ev CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT
For plugin-provided hooks, the root directory of the plugin.
.It Ev CLAUDE_PLUGIN_DATA
For plugin-provided hooks, a writable directory for plugin-specific
persistent data.
.El
.Sh PERMISSION DECISIONS
.Cm PreToolUse
handlers may return a JSON object with a
.Cm permissionDecision
field to control tool execution:
.Bl -tag -width "defer"
.It Cm allow
Permit the tool invocation without further prompting.
.It Cm deny
Block the tool invocation.
An optional
.Cm reason
field provides an explanation shown to the user.
.It Cm ask
Escalate to the user for a manual decision.
.It Cm defer
Take no action; let subsequent hooks or the default permission logic
decide.
This is the default behavior when no
.Cm permissionDecision
is returned.
.El
.Pp
Example response from a
.Cm PreToolUse
command handler:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "permissionDecision": "deny",
  "reason": "Writes to /etc are not permitted"
}
.Ed
.Sh INPUT REWRITING
.Cm PreToolUse
and
.Cm UserPromptSubmit
handlers may return an
.Cm updatedInput
field in their JSON response to modify the input before it is processed.
.Pp
For
.Cm PreToolUse ,
.Cm updatedInput
replaces the tool's input object:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "updatedInput": {
    "command": "ls -la",
    "timeout": 30000
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
For
.Cm UserPromptSubmit ,
.Cm updatedInput
replaces the user's prompt text:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "updatedInput": "Modified prompt text"
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr claude-code-settings 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Anthropic , PBC
