.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd April 22, 2026
.Dt CLOWN-JSON 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown.json
.Nd HTTP MCP server manifest for clown plugins
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Nm
file declares HTTP-based MCP servers that
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
should launch and manage during a Claude Code session.
It is located at the root of a plugin directory, as a sibling to the
.Pa .claude-plugin/
directory.
.Pp
HTTP MCP servers enable features unavailable over stdio transport,
including
.Li notifications/tools/list_changed
(server-initiated tool list updates) and server-initiated requests via
persistent SSE connections.
.Sh FORMAT
.Nm
is a JSON file with the following top-level fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa version Pq integer, required
Schema version.
Must be
.Li 1 .
.It Fa httpServers Pq object, required
A map of server name to server definition.
Each key is a short identifier used in MCP server naming
.Pq combined with the plugin name as Ar plugin Ns / Ns Ar server .
.El
.Ss Server Definition
Each server definition is an object with the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa command Pq string, required
Path to the server binary.
Relative paths are resolved against the plugin directory.
.It Fa args Pq array of strings, optional
Command-line arguments.
Default:
.Li [] .
.It Fa env Pq object, optional
Environment variables as key-value string pairs.
These are added to the inherited process environment.
Default:
.Li {} .
.It Fa transport Pq string, optional
MCP transport type.
Valid values:
.Li streamable-http
(default),
.Li sse .
The handshake line from the server is authoritative if it differs
from this value.
.It Fa healthcheck Pq object, optional
Health check configuration.
.El
.Ss Healthcheck Definition
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa path Pq string, optional
HTTP path to poll.
Default:
.Pa /healthz .
.It Fa interval Pq string, optional
Go
.Xr time.ParseDuration 3
format polling interval.
Default:
.Li 1s .
.It Fa timeout Pq string, optional
Maximum time to wait for the server to become healthy.
Default:
.Li 30s .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa <plugin-dir>/clown.json
The manifest file.
Must be a sibling to
.Pa .claude-plugin/ .
.It Pa <plugin-dir>/.claude-plugin/plugin.json
The Claude Code plugin manifest.
Its
.Fa name
field is used as the plugin name prefix in MCP server naming.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Minimal manifest:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "version": 1,
  "httpServers": {
    "my-server": {
      "command": "bin/my-server"
    }
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Full manifest with all fields:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "version": 1,
  "httpServers": {
    "my-server": {
      "command": "bin/my-server",
      "args": ["--mode", "mcp"],
      "env": { "LOG_LEVEL": "info" },
      "transport": "streamable-http",
      "healthcheck": {
        "path": "/healthz",
        "interval": "1s",
        "timeout": "30s"
      }
    }
  }
}
.Ed
.Sh SERVER REQUIREMENTS
Servers declared in
.Nm
must conform to the clown plugin protocol:
.Bl -enum
.It
Bind to
.Li 127.0.0.1:0
(ephemeral port).
.It
Print a handshake line to stdout (see
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 ,
.Sx HANDSHAKE PROTOCOL ) .
.It
Flush stdout.
.It
Respond to HTTP GET on the health check path with status 200 when
ready.
.It
Shut down gracefully on
.Dv SIGTERM .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 ,
.Xr claude-code-settings 5 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
