.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 OpenAI
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CODEX-CONFIG 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm codex-config
.Nd configuration file format for
.Xr codex 1
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr codex 1
reads its configuration from TOML files at several locations.
Settings are merged with the following precedence, highest first:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
CLI flags
.Pq Fl c Ar key=value , Fl m , Fl a , Fl s , No etc.
.It
Named profile
.Pq Fl p Ar name
.It
Project config
.Pq Pa .codex/config.toml
.It
User config
.Pq Pa ~/.codex/config.toml
.It
System config
.Pq Pa /etc/codex/config.toml
.It
Built-in defaults
.El
.Pp
Project-level configuration files
.Pq Pa .codex/config.toml
are subject to the project trust model.
On first encounter,
.Nm codex
prompts the user to trust or reject the project configuration.
Trusted projects are recorded in the user-level state directory.
.Sh FILE LOCATIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/codex/config.toml
System-wide defaults.
Typically managed by an administrator.
.It Pa ~/.codex/config.toml
Per-user configuration.
This is the primary location for personal preferences.
.It Pa .codex/config.toml
Project-level configuration, relative to the repository root.
Overrides user and system settings when the project is trusted.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ev CODEX_HOME
environment variable overrides the
.Pa ~/.codex
base directory.
.Sh MODEL SETTINGS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va model Pq string
Model identifier for the primary agent.
Examples:
.Ql o4-mini ,
.Ql gpt-4.1 ,
.Ql codex-mini-latest .
.It Va model_provider Pq string
Identifier of a custom model provider defined in
.Va [model_providers] .
When set, API requests are routed through the specified provider
instead of the OpenAI default.
.It Va model_reasoning_effort Pq string
Reasoning effort hint passed to the model.
Accepted values depend on the model; common values are
.Ql low ,
.Ql medium ,
and
.Ql high .
.It Va model_reasoning_summary Pq string
Controls whether the model emits reasoning summaries.
.It Va model_verbosity Pq string
Controls how verbose model responses are.
.It Va model_context_window Pq integer
Override the context window size in tokens.
Useful when using a custom provider with a non-standard window.
.It Va model_auto_compact_token_limit Pq integer
Token threshold at which
.Nm codex
automatically compacts the conversation history.
.It Va review_model Pq string
Model identifier used for the approval guardian sub-agent
when
.Va approvals_reviewer
is set to
.Cm guardian_subagent .
.El
.Sh APPROVAL POLICY
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va approval_policy Pq string
Top-level approval mode:
.Cm untrusted ,
.Cm on-request ,
or
.Cm never .
See
.Xr codex 1
for descriptions of each mode.
.El
.Pp
Fine-grained approval sub-keys:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va approval_policy.mcp_elicitations Pq string
Approval policy for MCP server elicitation requests.
.It Va approval_policy.request_permissions Pq string
Policy for model-initiated permission requests.
.It Va approval_policy.rules Pq array of tables
Exec-policy rules that match commands to allow, deny, or prompt.
Each rule has a
.Va pattern
and an
.Va action .
.It Va approval_policy.sandbox_approval Pq string
Policy for commands that would exceed sandbox restrictions.
.It Va approval_policy.skill_approval Pq string
Policy for skill invocations.
.El
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va approvals_reviewer Pq string
Who reviews approval requests.
One of
.Cm user
.Pq default, interactive prompts
or
.Cm guardian_subagent
.Pq automated review by the Va review_model .
.El
.Sh SANDBOX SETTINGS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va sandbox_mode Pq string
Sandbox execution mode:
.Cm read-only ,
.Cm workspace-write ,
or
.Cm danger-full-access .
.El
.Pp
The
.Va [sandbox_workspace_write]
table configures the
.Cm workspace-write
sandbox mode:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va writable_roots Pq array of strings
Additional filesystem paths the sandbox permits writes to,
beyond the project workspace.
Paths may be absolute or relative to the workspace root.
.It Va network_access Pq boolean
Whether to allow network access from sandboxed commands.
Default is
.Cm false .
.El
.Sh PERMISSIONS PROFILES
Named permission profiles can be defined under
.Va [permissions.name] :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[permissions.ci]
approval_policy = "never"
sandbox_mode = "workspace-write"

[permissions.review]
approval_policy = "untrusted"
sandbox_mode = "read-only"
.Ed
.Pp
Activate a profile with
.Fl p Ar name
on the command line.
Profile settings override file-based configuration
but are overridden by explicit CLI flags.
.Sh MCP SERVERS
MCP servers are configured under
.Va [mcp_servers.id] ,
where
.Va id
is a user-chosen identifier:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[mcp_servers.my-server]
command = "/usr/local/bin/my-mcp-server"
args = ["--verbose"]
env = { API_KEY = "secret" }
cwd = "/opt/my-server"
enabled = true
required = false
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va command Pq string
Path to the MCP server executable.
Used for stdio transport.
Mutually exclusive with
.Va url .
.It Va args Pq array of strings
Arguments passed to the server command.
.It Va url Pq string
URL for HTTP-based MCP servers.
Mutually exclusive with
.Va command .
.It Va env Pq table
Environment variables to set in the server process.
.It Va cwd Pq string
Working directory for the server process.
.It Va enabled Pq boolean
Whether the server is active.
Default is
.Cm true .
.It Va required Pq boolean
If
.Cm true ,
.Nm codex
fails to start when this server is unavailable.
Default is
.Cm false .
.It Va enabled_tools Pq array of strings
Allowlist of tool names to expose.
When set, only these tools are available.
.It Va disabled_tools Pq array of strings
Denylist of tool names to hide.
Applied after
.Va enabled_tools .
.It Va timeouts Pq table
Timeout settings for the server connection:
.Va connect ,
.Va read ,
.Va write
in seconds.
.It Va bearer_token_env_var Pq string
Name of the environment variable containing a bearer token
for HTTP authentication.
.It Va supports_parallel_tool_calls Pq boolean
Whether the server supports concurrent tool invocations.
Default is
.Cm true .
.It Va scopes Pq array of strings
OAuth scopes requested during MCP server authentication.
.It Va oauth_resource Pq string
OAuth resource identifier for token exchange.
.El
.Sh SHELL ENVIRONMENT POLICY
The
.Va [shell_env]
table controls which environment variables are visible to
sandboxed commands:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va inherit Pq boolean
If
.Cm true
.Pq default ,
the sandboxed process inherits the parent environment,
subject to filtering by
.Va exclude .
If
.Cm false ,
the process starts with an empty environment.
.It Va exclude Pq array of strings
Variable names or glob patterns to strip from the inherited environment.
Applied only when
.Va inherit
is
.Cm true .
.It Va include_only Pq array of strings
If set, only these variables are inherited.
Mutually exclusive with
.Va exclude .
.It Va ignore_default_excludes Pq boolean
If
.Cm true ,
skip the built-in default exclusion list
.Pq e.g., credentials, tokens .
Default is
.Cm false .
.It Va set Pq table
Explicit variable assignments.
These are set regardless of inheritance mode.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[shell_env.set]
LANG = "en_US.UTF-8"
NODE_ENV = "development"
.Ed
.El
.Sh FEATURE FLAGS
Feature flags are toggled under the
.Va [features]
table.
All values are booleans.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va shell_tool
Enable the shell tool for command execution.
.It Va unified_exec
Use the unified execution engine.
.It Va shell_snapshot
Take filesystem snapshots before and after shell commands.
.It Va multi_agent
Enable multi-agent orchestration.
.It Va personality
Enable personality customization.
.It Va fast_mode
Enable low-latency mode with reduced reasoning.
.It Va enable_request_compression
Compress API requests to reduce bandwidth.
.It Va skill_mcp_dependency_install
Automatically install MCP dependencies for skills.
.It Va undo
Enable undo support for file modifications.
.It Va apps
Enable Codex Apps.
.It Va codex_hooks
Enable lifecycle hooks
.Pq see Xr codex-env 7 .
.It Va smart_approvals
Use heuristics to auto-approve low-risk tool calls.
.It Va prevent_idle_sleep
Prevent the system from sleeping while
.Nm codex
is running.
.El
.Sh AGENTS
Multi-agent settings are configured under the
.Va [agents]
table:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va max_threads Pq integer
Maximum number of concurrent sub-agent threads.
.It Va max_depth Pq integer
Maximum nesting depth for sub-agent spawning.
.It Va job_max_runtime_seconds Pq integer
Maximum runtime in seconds for any single agent job.
.El
.Pp
Per-agent configuration is specified under
.Va [agents.configs.name] :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va config_file Pq string
Path to a TOML configuration file for this agent.
.It Va description Pq string
Human-readable description of the agent's purpose.
.It Va nickname_candidates Pq array of strings
List of nickname options for the sub-agent.
One is chosen at random when spawning.
.El
.Sh NOTIFICATIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va notify Pq array of strings
Command to run for desktop notifications.
The command receives the notification text as its final argument.
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
notify = ["terminal-notifier", "-title", "Codex"]
.Ed
.It Va tui.notifications Pq boolean
Enable in-TUI notification banners.
.It Va tui.notification_method Pq string
Method for TUI notifications.
.El
.Sh OBSERVABILITY
OpenTelemetry configuration under
.Va [otel] :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va exporters Pq table
OTLP exporter configuration
.Pq endpoint, protocol, headers .
.It Va metrics Pq boolean
Enable metrics export.
.It Va traces Pq boolean
Enable trace export.
.El
.Sh ANALYTICS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va [analytics]
.It Va enabled Pq boolean
Enable anonymous usage analytics.
Default is
.Cm true .
.El
.Sh AUTHENTICATION SETTINGS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va cli_auth_credentials_store Pq string
Backend for storing CLI credentials.
.It Va forced_login_method Pq string
Force a specific login method, overriding the default.
.It Va forced_chatgpt_workspace_id Pq string
Pin authentication to a specific ChatGPT workspace.
.El
.Sh OSS PROVIDERS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va oss_provider Pq string
Local OSS model provider.
One of
.Cm ollama
or
.Cm lmstudio .
Used when
.Fl Fl oss
is passed on the command line.
.El
.Sh CUSTOM MODEL PROVIDERS
Custom providers are defined under
.Va [model_providers.id] :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[model_providers.my-provider]
base_url = "https://api.example.com/v1"
env_key = "MY_PROVIDER_API_KEY"
wire_api = "openai"

[model_providers.my-provider.auth]
command = "/usr/local/bin/get-token"
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va base_url Pq string
Base URL for the API endpoint.
.It Va env_key Pq string
Environment variable name containing the API key.
.It Va wire_api Pq string
Wire protocol.
Currently only
.Cm openai
is supported.
.It Va auth.command Pq string
Path to an executable that prints authentication credentials to stdout.
Invoked before each API request.
.El
.Sh LOGGING
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va log_dir Pq string
Directory for log files.
Defaults to
.Pa $CODEX_HOME/logs .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Minimal user configuration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
model = "o4-mini"
approval_policy = "on-request"
sandbox_mode = "workspace-write"
.Ed
.Pp
CI configuration with custom provider:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
model = "gpt-4.1"
model_provider = "azure"
approval_policy = "never"
sandbox_mode = "workspace-write"

[model_providers.azure]
base_url = "https://my-resource.openai.azure.com/v1"
env_key = "AZURE_OPENAI_KEY"
wire_api = "openai"

[features]
multi_agent = true
codex_hooks = true

[agents]
max_threads = 4
max_depth = 2
.Ed
.Pp
Project config with MCP server and permissions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[mcp_servers.project-tools]
command = "./tools/mcp-server"
args = ["--config", ".codex/tools.json"]
required = true
enabled_tools = ["lint", "format", "test"]

[permissions.safe]
approval_policy = "never"
sandbox_mode = "workspace-write"

[sandbox_workspace_write]
writable_roots = ["/tmp/codex-builds"]
network_access = true
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr codex 1 ,
.Xr codex-env 7
.Sh AUTHORS
OpenAI
.Aq Mt https://openai.com
