.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Anthropic, PBC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CLAUDE-CODE-ENV 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm claude-code-env
.Nd environment variables for Claude Code
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr claude-code 1
reads numerous environment variables to configure API access, model
selection, resource limits, display behavior, and other runtime
parameters.
This page documents all recognized variables grouped by category.
.Pp
Environment variables generally have lower precedence than command-line
flags and settings files.
See
.Xr claude-code-settings 5
for the full precedence order.
.Sh API AND AUTHENTICATION
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for direct access to the Anthropic API.
When set, bypasses OAuth authentication.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_AUTH_TOKEN
Bearer token for Anthropic API authentication.
Alternative to
.Ev ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
for token-based auth flows.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_BETAS
Comma-separated list of beta feature flags to enable on API requests.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_CUSTOM_HEADERS
JSON object or comma-separated
.Ar key:value
pairs of additional HTTP headers to include in all API requests.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_BASE_URL
Override the base URL for the Anthropic API.
Used for proxies or alternative API endpoints.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_TOKEN
OAuth access token for authentication.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_REFRESH_TOKEN
OAuth refresh token for automatic token renewal.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_OAUTH_SCOPES
Comma-separated OAuth scopes to request.
.El
.Sh CLOUD PROVIDER CONFIGURATION
.Ss Amazon Bedrock
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_BEDROCK_BASE_URL
Base URL for the Amazon Bedrock API endpoint.
Setting this variable enables Bedrock mode.
.It Ev AWS_BEARER_TOKEN_BEDROCK
Bearer token for Bedrock authentication.
Alternative to standard AWS credential chain.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SKIP_BEDROCK_AUTH
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
skip Bedrock-specific authentication setup.
Useful when authentication is handled externally.
.El
.Ss Google Cloud Vertex AI
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_VERTEX_PROJECT_ID
Google Cloud project ID for Vertex AI.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_VERTEX_REGION
Google Cloud region for the Vertex AI endpoint
.Pq e.g., Qq us-east5 .
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SKIP_VERTEX_AUTH
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
skip Vertex-specific authentication setup.
.El
.Ss Azure AI Foundry
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_FOUNDRY_BASE_URL
Base URL for the Azure AI Foundry API endpoint.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_FOUNDRY_AUTH_TOKEN
Authentication token for Azure AI Foundry.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_FOUNDRY_RESOURCE_ID
Azure resource identifier for the Foundry deployment.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SKIP_FOUNDRY_AUTH
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
skip Foundry-specific authentication setup.
.El
.Sh MODEL SELECTION
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_MODEL
Override the default model.
Equivalent to
.Fl -model
on the command line.
Accepts shorthand names
.Pq Cm sonnet , Cm opus
or fully-qualified model identifiers.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_SONNET_MODEL
Set the model identifier that the
.Cm sonnet
shorthand resolves to.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_OPUS_MODEL
Set the model identifier that the
.Cm opus
shorthand resolves to.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_DEFAULT_HAIKU_MODEL
Set the model identifier that the
.Cm haiku
shorthand resolves to.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_CUSTOM_MODEL_OPTION
Add a custom model name to the model selection menu in interactive mode.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SUBAGENT_MODEL
Override the model used for subagent invocations.
By default, subagents use the same model as the parent session.
.El
.Sh THINKING AND REASONING
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_THINKING
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable extended thinking
.Pq chain-of-thought reasoning
entirely.
.It Ev MAX_THINKING_TOKENS
Maximum number of tokens allocated to extended thinking.
Higher values allow deeper reasoning at the cost of latency and token
usage.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_ADAPTIVE_THINKING
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable adaptive thinking, which dynamically adjusts
thinking budget based on query complexity.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_EFFORT_LEVEL
Set the reasoning effort level.
One of:
.Cm low ,
.Cm medium ,
.Cm high ,
.Cm max .
Equivalent to
.Fl -effort
on the command line.
.El
.Sh TOKEN LIMITS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS
Maximum number of tokens in the model's response.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_FILE_READ_MAX_OUTPUT_TOKENS
Maximum output tokens when the model is performing file reads.
Allows larger responses for file-heavy operations.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_MAX_CONTEXT_TOKENS
Maximum context window size in tokens.
Limits how much conversation history and context is sent to the model.
.El
.Sh TIMEOUTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev API_TIMEOUT_MS
Timeout in milliseconds for API requests.
Applies to the initial connection and response headers.
.It Ev BASH_DEFAULT_TIMEOUT_MS
Default timeout in milliseconds for Bash tool invocations.
.It Ev BASH_MAX_TIMEOUT_MS
Maximum allowed timeout for Bash tool invocations.
The model may request longer timeouts, but they are capped at this
value.
.It Ev CLAUDE_STREAM_IDLE_TIMEOUT_MS
Timeout in milliseconds for idle streaming connections.
If no data is received for this duration, the stream is considered
stalled.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_EXIT_AFTER_STOP_DELAY
Delay in milliseconds before the process exits after a stop event.
Allows pending operations to complete.
.El
.Sh BASH AND SHELL
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev BASH_MAX_OUTPUT_LENGTH
Maximum number of characters captured from Bash tool output.
Output exceeding this limit is truncated.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SHELL
Override the shell used for Bash tool invocations.
Defaults to the user's login shell.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SHELL_PREFIX
Command prefix prepended to all Bash tool invocations.
Useful for wrapping commands with
.Xr nix-shell 1
or similar environments.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_BASH_MAINTAIN_PROJECT_WORKING_DIR
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
always reset the working directory to the project root before each
Bash tool invocation.
.It Ev CLAUDECODE
Set to
.Qq 1
by
.Xr claude-code 1
in the environment of all child processes.
Scripts can check this variable to detect when they are running inside a
Claude Code session.
.El
.Sh MEMORY AND FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_AUTO_MEMORY
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable automatic memory updates.
Claude will not write to
.Pa CLAUDE.md
files automatically.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_CLAUDE_MDS
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
do not load any
.Pa CLAUDE.md
files into the system prompt.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_FILE_CHECKPOINTING
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable automatic file checkpointing.
Claude normally takes snapshots of files before editing them.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_GLOB_MAX_FILES
Maximum number of files returned by glob operations.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_GLOB_MAX_DEPTH
Maximum directory depth for glob traversal.
.El
.Sh CONTEXT MANAGEMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_AUTOCOMPACT_PCT_OVERRIDE
Override the context usage percentage at which automatic compaction
triggers.
Value is an integer from 0 to 100.
Lower values compact more aggressively.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_AUTO_COMPACT_WINDOW
Number of recent messages to preserve during automatic compaction.
Messages within this window are not summarized.
.El
.Sh PLUGINS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_PLUGIN_CACHE_DIR
Override the directory used for caching downloaded plugin assets.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_PLUGIN_SEED_DIR
Directory containing pre-installed plugins.
Plugins in this directory are available without installation.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SYNC_PLUGIN_INSTALL
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
install plugins synchronously at session start rather than in the
background.
.El
.Sh DEBUG AND LOGGING
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DEBUG_LOGS_DIR
Directory where debug log files are written.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DEBUG_LOG_LEVEL
Minimum log level for debug output.
One of:
.Cm trace ,
.Cm debug ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm warn ,
.Cm error .
.El
.Sh DISPLAY AND ACCESSIBILITY
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_NO_FLICKER
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable UI animations and transitions that may cause flickering.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_MOUSE
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable mouse input handling in the terminal UI.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SCROLL_SPEED
Set the scroll speed for the terminal UI.
Integer value; higher is faster.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SYNTAX_HIGHLIGHT
When set to
.Qq 0 ,
disable syntax highlighting in code output.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_TMUX_TRUECOLOR
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable 24-bit true color output inside tmux sessions.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_CODE_ACCESSIBILITY
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable accessibility features for code display
.Pq e.g., high-contrast themes, screen reader hints .
.El
.Sh FEATURES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_BACKGROUND_TASKS
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable background task processing.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_ENABLE_TASKS
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable the task management system for tracking and resuming long-running
work.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_CRON
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable scheduled/cron task execution.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_EXPERIMENTAL_AGENT_TEAMS
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable experimental multi-agent team collaboration features.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_GIT_INSTRUCTIONS
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
do not include git repository context
.Pq status, recent commits
in the system prompt.
.El
.Sh MCP AND TOOLS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ENABLE_TOOL_SEARCH
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable semantic search over available tools.
Helps Claude discover relevant tools for complex tasks.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_MAX_TOOL_USE_CONCURRENCY
Maximum number of tool invocations that can run concurrently.
Default is 1
.Pq sequential execution .
.It Ev MCP_TIMEOUT
Timeout in milliseconds for MCP server initialization and tool
invocations.
.It Ev MAX_MCP_OUTPUT_TOKENS
Maximum number of tokens in MCP tool output.
Large outputs are truncated to this limit.
.El
.Sh SECURITY
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SUBPROCESS_ENV_SCRUB
Comma-separated list of environment variable names to remove from the
environment of child processes spawned by tools.
Prevents sensitive variables from leaking to subprocesses.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SCRIPT_CAPS
Comma-separated list of capability flags for script execution.
Controls what operations scripts invoked by hooks and commands are
allowed to perform.
.El
.Sh TELEMETRY AND UPDATES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev DISABLE_TELEMETRY
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable all telemetry reporting.
.It Ev DISABLE_AUTOUPDATER
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable automatic update checks and installation.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_DISABLE_NONESSENTIAL_TRAFFIC
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
disable non-essential network traffic including telemetry, update
checks, and analytics.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_ENABLE_TELEMETRY
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
explicitly enable telemetry.
Overrides
.Ev DISABLE_TELEMETRY
when both are set.
.El
.Sh TLS AND CERTIFICATES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_CERT_STORE
Path to a custom CA certificate store file
.Pq PEM format .
Used for corporate proxies or self-signed certificates.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_CLIENT_CERT
Path to a client certificate file for mutual TLS authentication.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_CLIENT_KEY
Path to the private key file corresponding to
.Ev CLAUDE_CODE_CLIENT_CERT .
.El
.Sh SESSION AND PATHS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_CONFIG_DIR
Override the default configuration directory
.Pq normally Pa ~/.claude .
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_TMPDIR
Override the temporary directory used for session data, file
checkpoints, and other transient files.
.It Ev CLAUDE_ENV_FILE
Path to a file where hooks and tools can write
.Ar KEY=VALUE
pairs.
Variables defined in this file are injected into subsequent tool
invocations.
See
.Xr claude-code-hooks 5 .
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SIMPLE
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
use a simplified UI mode with reduced visual complexity.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_REMOTE
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
indicates the session is running in remote mode.
Adjusts UI and behavior for remote connections.
.El
.Sh NETWORK AND STREAMING
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLAUDE_ENABLE_STREAM_WATCHDOG
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable the stream watchdog timer.
Detects and recovers from stalled API response streams.
.It Ev CLAUDE_ENABLE_BYTE_WATCHDOG
When set to
.Qq 1 ,
enable byte-level watchdog monitoring.
Detects stalls at the TCP byte stream level rather than the
application-level message stream.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr claude-code-settings 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Anthropic , PBC
