.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CLOWN-PLUGIN-PROTOCOL 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown-plugin-protocol
.Nd HTTP MCP server lifecycle protocol for clown plugins
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The clown plugin protocol enables Claude Code plugins to declare HTTP-based
MCP servers as local commands that are automatically launched at session
start and torn down at session end.
.Pp
HTTP MCP transports
.Pq Li streamable-http , Li sse
enable features unavailable over stdio:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
.Li notifications/tools/list_changed
\(em the server can push tool list updates to the client without polling
.It
Server-initiated requests via persistent SSE connections
.El
.Pp
The protocol covers seven phases: discovery, handshake, health checking,
failure handling, plugin manifest compilation, runtime, and shutdown.
It is modeled on the
.Lk https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin "hashicorp/go-plugin"
handshake protocol.
.Sh DISCOVERY
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
receives plugin directories via
.Fl -plugin-dir
flags.
For each directory, it checks for a
.Pa clown.json
manifest (see
.Xr clown-json 5 ) .
Directories without
.Pa clown.json
are silently skipped.
.Pp
If no
.Pa clown.json
files are found in any plugin directory,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
exec's directly into the downstream command with zero overhead \(em no
child process, no intermediate config file.
.Pp
Each entry in
.Fa httpServers
within a discovered
.Pa clown.json
becomes a managed server.
The plugin name is read from
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json
in the same directory.
.Sh HANDSHAKE PROTOCOL
Each HTTP MCP server MUST print a single pipe-delimited line to stdout
before serving requests:
.Pp
.Dl 1|1|tcp|127.0.0.1:54321|streamable-http
.Ss Fields
.Bl -column "Pos" "Name" "Values" -offset indent
.It Sy Pos Ta Sy Name Ta Sy Values
.It 0 Ta Core protocol version Ta MUST be Li 1
.It 1 Ta App protocol version Ta Integer; MUST be Li 1 No (reserved)
.It 2 Ta Network type Ta MUST be Li tcp
.It 3 Ta Network address Ta Ar host Ns Li \&: Ns Ar port
.It 4 Ta Protocol Ta Li streamable-http No or Li sse
.El
.Ss Requirements
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
The server MUST bind to
.Li 127.0.0.1:0
(ephemeral port, loopback only).
.It
The server MUST print the handshake line to stdout and flush.
.It
The server MUST begin serving HTTP requests after the handshake.
.It
The server MUST NOT write additional data to stdout after the handshake.
Diagnostic output MUST go to stderr.
.It
Extra fields beyond position 4 MAY be present and MUST be ignored by the
host.
.It
Leading and trailing whitespace MUST be tolerated by the parser.
.El
.Ss Protocol Authority
The protocol field in the handshake line is authoritative.
If it differs from the
.Fa transport
field in
.Pa clown.json ,
the handshake value takes precedence.
This allows servers to negotiate transport at runtime.
.Sh HEALTH CHECKING
After reading the handshake, the host polls
.Li http://<addr><healthcheck.path>
at the configured interval.
The server is considered healthy when it returns HTTP 200.
.Pp
Default health check parameters (overridable in
.Pa clown.json ) :
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It path
.Pa /healthz
.It interval
.Li 1s
.It timeout
.Li 30s
.El
.Pp
If the timeout elapses before a 200 response, the server process is
killed and recorded as a failure.
All servers are launched and health-checked in parallel.
The host collects per-server outcomes into a start report and then
decides whether to proceed with the healthy subset or abort; see
.Sx FAILURE HANDLING .
.Sh FAILURE HANDLING
A server is considered failed if any of the following occur: the child
process exits or cannot be exec'd, its first stdout line is not a valid
handshake, its handshake times out, or its health check does not return
HTTP 200 within the configured timeout.
.Pp
The host emits one failure record per affected server (to stderr and to
the log described in
.Sx LOGGING )
and then chooses one of three branches:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li --skip-failed No or Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS Ns = Ns Li 1
Continue with only the servers that came up healthy.
If none came up, exec the downstream command directly.
.It Interactive Pq stdin and stderr are terminals
Render a confirmation prompt listing every failure.
Continuing is equivalent to
.Li --skip-failed ;
declining aborts.
.It Non-interactive, no opt-in
Shut down any healthy servers and exit non-zero.
This is the default and preserves pre-2026-04 behavior.
.El
.Pp
When the host proceeds with a partial set, only the healthy servers
appear in the generated MCP configuration
.Pq see Sx MCP CONFIGURATION .
Failed servers are absent from the configuration but retain their log
records for later inspection.
.Sh PLUGIN MANIFEST COMPILATION
For each plugin directory whose
.Pa clown.json
contributed at least one HTTP MCP server,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
.Em compiles
a replacement plugin manifest so Claude Code's native plugin loader does
not re-register the same MCP servers that clown-plugin-host is already
serving over HTTP.
.Pp
Compilation steps:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Create a staging directory under the OS temp root.
.It
Symlink every top-level entry of the source plugin directory (other than
.Pa .claude-plugin )
into the staging directory.
.It
Create a real
.Pa .claude-plugin/
directory in the staging dir and symlink every file under it other than
.Pa plugin.json .
.It
Read the source
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json ,
remove the
.Li mcpServers
key, and write the result to the staged
.Pa plugin.json .
.El
.Pp
Claude Code is handed the staged directory via
.Fl -plugin-dir
instead of the original.
The original plugin directory is never modified.
Hooks, skills, commands, agents, and sub-agents continue to load from
the staged directory via symlinks into the source tree.
.Pp
Compiled staging directories are tracked by the host and removed during
shutdown.
See
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
for the
.Fl -disable-clown-protocol
opt-out, which bypasses compilation and passes plugin directories to
Claude Code unmodified.
.Sh MCP CONFIGURATION
Once all servers are healthy, the host generates a temporary MCP
configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "<plugin-name>/<server-name>": {
      "type": "http",
      "url": "http://127.0.0.1:<port>/mcp"
    }
  }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Server names use the format
.Ar plugin-name Ns / Ns Ar server-name .
The
.Li type
field is
.Li http
for
.Li streamable-http
servers (URL path
.Pa /mcp )
and
.Li sse
for
.Li sse
servers (URL path
.Pa /sse ) .
Claude Code's MCP configuration schema rejects entries without a
.Li type
discriminator.
.Pp
The file is passed to the downstream command
.Pq typically Xr claude-code 1
via
.Fl -mcp-config .
.Pp
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
also prepends one
.Fl -plugin-dir
flag per plugin directory, using the compiled staged path when the
plugin was compiled and the original path otherwise.
Callers MUST NOT add
.Fl -plugin-dir
directly to the downstream args themselves \(em clown-plugin-host owns
that routing.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
When the downstream command exits:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
.Dv SIGTERM
is sent to each server's process group.
.It
The host waits up to 5 seconds for each server to exit gracefully.
.It
If a server has not exited after the grace period,
.Dv SIGKILL
is sent to its process group.
.It
The temporary MCP configuration file is removed.
.It
Each compiled staging directory (see
.Sx PLUGIN MANIFEST COMPILATION )
is removed.
.It
The host exits with the downstream command's exit code.
.El
.Sh PROCESS ISOLATION
Each server runs in its own process group
.Pq via Dv setpgid .
This provides:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Clean signal delivery \(em the entire server process tree receives
.Dv SIGTERM .
.It
Reliable cleanup \(em
.Dv SIGKILL
reaches all child processes.
.It
Isolation between servers \(em one server's crash does not affect others.
.El
.Pp
The server's stderr is forwarded to the host's stderr with a
.Li [plugin-name/server-name]
prefix, and each line is additionally captured as a structured record
in the host's log file (see
.Sx LOGGING ) .
.Sh LOGGING
The host writes a per-invocation log file to
.Pa $XDG_LOG_HOME/clown/ ,
defaulting to
.Pa $HOME/.local/log/clown/
when
.Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
is unset or empty (per the XDG Base Directory Specification).
Filenames have the form
.Pa clown-plugin-host- Ns Ar UTC-timestamp Ns Pa - Ns Ar pid Ns Pa .log ,
so each invocation is isolated.
.Pp
Records use
.Xr slog 3
text format
.Pq Li key=value
and cover: startup arguments and policy; server start, handshake,
healthcheck, and shutdown transitions; every line of managed-server
stderr tagged with the server name; signal forwarding to the downstream;
and the downstream's exit status.
.Pp
The host prints the resolved log path to stderr on startup.
The XDG spec permits unbounded growth and guarantees log deletion does
not affect correctness; the host does not rotate or prune files.
See
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
for the authoritative field list.
.Sh ARCHITECTURE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
clown (shell wrapper)
  \(da exec clown-plugin-host --plugin-dir A [--skip-failed]
        [--disable-clown-protocol] -- claude [args]
       \(br\(em open $XDG_LOG_HOME/clown/clown-plugin-host-*.log
       \(br\(em [--disable-clown-protocol]
       \(br    \(-> exec claude with original --plugin-dir (pass-through)
       \(br\(em [no clown.json found]
       \(br    \(-> exec claude with original --plugin-dir (pass-through)
       \(da\(em [clown.json found]
            \(br\(em launch HTTP server children (parallel)
            \(br\(em read handshake + poll healthz
            \(br\(em collect per-server start report
            \(br\(em [any failures] \(-> skip / prompt / abort
            \(br\(em compile plugin manifests (plugin.json mcpServers stripped)
            \(br    into staging dirs
            \(br\(em generate temp .mcp.json for healthy servers
            \(br\(em run claude as child with --mcp-config and compiled
            \(br    --plugin-dir flags
            \(br\(em forward signals (SIGTERM, SIGINT)
            \(br\(em wait for claude to exit
            \(br\(em SIGTERM servers \(-> grace period \(-> SIGKILL
            \(br\(em remove compiled staging dirs
            \(da\(em exit with claude's exit code
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
This protocol is additive.
Plugins without
.Pa clown.json
are unaffected (exec pass-through).
Existing stdio MCP servers in
.Pa .mcp.json
continue to work.
A plugin MAY ship both
.Pa clown.json
(for HTTP servers) and
.Pa .mcp.json
(for stdio servers) simultaneously.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 ,
.Xr clown-json 5
.Sh STANDARDS
This protocol is specified in full in
.Pa docs/rfcs/0002-clown-plugin-protocol.md
within the clown source repository.
.Pp
The handshake format is adapted from
.Lk https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin "hashicorp/go-plugin" .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Servers MUST bind to
.Li 127.0.0.1
only.
The protocol does not support remote addresses.
.It
Servers inherit the same trust level as any other code in the plugin \(em
they can read files, make network requests, and serve MCP tools that
influence model behavior.
.It
Clown's managed-settings guardrails (Bash disabled, auto-mode disabled)
apply regardless of which HTTP MCP servers are running.
Servers cannot override managed settings.
.El
