.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 OpenAI
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CODEX-ENV 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm codex-env
.Nd environment variables and lifecycle hooks for
.Xr codex 1
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual documents the environment variables recognized by
.Xr codex 1 ,
the shell environment policy that controls variable inheritance
in sandboxed commands,
and the lifecycle hooks system.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CODEX_HOME
Base directory for configuration and state files.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.codex .
When set, all paths that would normally resolve under
.Pa ~/.codex
use this directory instead:
.Pp
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
.Pa $CODEX_HOME/config.toml
.It
.Pa $CODEX_HOME/auth.json
.It
.Pa $CODEX_HOME/history.jsonl
.It
.Pa $CODEX_HOME/hooks.json
.El
.It Ev CODEX_CA_CERTIFICATE
Path to a PEM-encoded CA certificate bundle.
When set,
.Nm codex
uses this bundle for all TLS connections instead of the system default.
Useful in corporate environments with custom root CAs.
.It Ev CODEX_SQLITE_HOME
Directory for the SQLite database that stores session state,
trust decisions, and other persistent data.
Defaults to
.Pa $CODEX_HOME .
.It Ev SSL_CERT_FILE
Fallback CA certificate bundle path.
Consulted only when
.Ev CODEX_CA_CERTIFICATE
is not set.
This variable is also recognized by many other TLS-aware programs.
.It Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for authenticating with the OpenAI API.
Used when no other authentication method
.Pq OAuth, custom provider auth
is configured.
This is the default
.Va env_key
for the built-in OpenAI provider.
.El
.Sh CUSTOM PROVIDER ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
Each custom model provider defined in
.Xr codex-config 5
under
.Va [model_providers.id]
can specify an
.Va env_key
field naming the environment variable that holds its API key.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[model_providers.anthropic]
base_url = "https://api.anthropic.com/v1"
env_key = "ANTHROPIC_API_KEY"
wire_api = "openai"
.Ed
.Pp
In this case,
.Nm codex
reads the API key from the
.Ev ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
environment variable.
The variable name is arbitrary and user-defined.
.Sh SHELL ENVIRONMENT POLICY
When
.Nm codex
executes shell commands inside the sandbox,
it does not blindly pass through the parent process environment.
The
.Va [shell_env]
configuration table
.Pq see Xr codex-config 5
controls which variables are visible to sandboxed processes.
.Ss Inheritance Mode
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va inherit = true Pq default
The sandboxed process starts with a copy of
.Nm codex Ns 's
own environment, then the
.Va exclude
list is applied to remove sensitive variables.
.It Va inherit = false
The sandboxed process starts with an empty environment.
Only variables listed in
.Va set
are available.
.El
.Ss Filtering
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va exclude Pq array of strings
Variable names or glob patterns
.Pq e.g., Ql *_SECRET , Ql AWS_*
to remove from the inherited environment.
A built-in default exclusion list removes common credential variables
.Pq Ev OPENAI_API_KEY , Ev AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY , No etc.
unless
.Va ignore_default_excludes
is set.
.It Va include_only Pq array of strings
When set, only these variables are inherited.
All others are stripped.
Mutually exclusive with
.Va exclude .
.It Va ignore_default_excludes Pq boolean
If
.Cm true ,
the built-in default exclusion list is skipped.
Use with caution \(em this may expose credentials to sandboxed commands.
.El
.Ss Explicit Variables
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va set Pq table
Key-value pairs that are unconditionally set in the sandboxed environment,
regardless of inheritance mode.
Useful for ensuring deterministic behavior:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[shell_env.set]
LANG = "en_US.UTF-8"
TERM = "xterm-256color"
.Ed
.Pp
Values from
.Va set
override inherited variables of the same name.
.El
.Sh LIFECYCLE HOOKS
.Bf -emphasis
Lifecycle hooks are experimental and must be enabled via the
.Va codex_hooks
feature flag.
.Ef
.Pp
Set
.Va codex_hooks = true
in the
.Va [features]
table of
.Xr codex-config 5
to enable hooks.
.Pp
Hooks are defined in JSON files at two locations:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.codex/hooks.json
User-level hooks.
Apply to all projects.
.It Pa .codex/hooks.json
Project-level hooks.
Apply only within the repository that contains this file.
Subject to the project trust model.
.El
.Pp
Both files use the same JSON format.
Project hooks are merged with user hooks;
project hooks take precedence for matching events.
.Ss Hook Events
The following lifecycle events can trigger hooks:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm SessionStart
Fired when a new
.Nm codex
session begins, before any prompts are processed.
.It Cm PreToolUse
Fired before a tool call is executed.
The hook receives the tool name and arguments.
Returning a non-zero exit code causes the tool call to be rejected.
.It Cm PostToolUse
Fired after a tool call completes.
The hook receives the tool name, arguments, and result.
.It Cm UserPromptSubmit
Fired when the user submits a prompt in the TUI.
.It Cm Stop
Fired when the session is about to end.
.El
.Ss Hook Definition
Each hook is a JSON object with the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va event Pq string
One of the lifecycle events listed above.
.It Va matcher Pq object, optional
Conditions that must be met for the hook to fire.
For
.Cm PreToolUse
and
.Cm PostToolUse ,
this can match on tool name patterns.
When omitted, the hook fires on every occurrence of the event.
.It Va type Pq string
Hook type.
Currently only
.Cm command
is supported.
.It Va command Pq string
Path to the executable to run when the hook fires.
The executable receives event context as a JSON document on stdin.
.It Va statusMessage Pq string, optional
Message displayed in the TUI while the hook is running.
.It Va timeout Pq integer, optional
Maximum execution time in seconds.
If the hook exceeds this timeout, it is killed
and the event proceeds as if the hook returned success.
Default is 30 seconds.
.El
.Ss Example hooks.json
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  "hooks": [
    {
      "event": "SessionStart",
      "type": "command",
      "command": "/usr/local/bin/codex-session-init",
      "statusMessage": "Initializing session...",
      "timeout": 10
    },
    {
      "event": "PreToolUse",
      "matcher": {
        "tool_name": "shell"
      },
      "type": "command",
      "command": "/usr/local/bin/codex-audit-shell",
      "statusMessage": "Auditing shell command...",
      "timeout": 5
    },
    {
      "event": "PostToolUse",
      "type": "command",
      "command": "/usr/local/bin/codex-post-tool-log"
    },
    {
      "event": "Stop",
      "type": "command",
      "command": "/usr/local/bin/codex-session-cleanup",
      "timeout": 15
    }
  ]
}
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Cm PreToolUse
hook in this example runs
.Pa codex-audit-shell
before every shell command.
If the script exits non-zero, the shell command is blocked
and the model is informed that the tool call was rejected.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.codex/
Default base directory for all
.Nm codex
state and configuration.
Overridden by
.Ev CODEX_HOME .
.It Pa ~/.codex/hooks.json
User-level lifecycle hooks.
.It Pa .codex/hooks.json
Project-level lifecycle hooks.
.It Pa ~/.codex/config.toml
User configuration; see
.Xr codex-config 5 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr codex 1 ,
.Xr codex-config 5
.Sh AUTHORS
OpenAI
.Aq Mt https://openai.com
