.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt RINGMASTER 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ringmaster
.Nd architecture and JSON-RPC wire format for the llama-server control plane
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the control plane for local
.Xr llama-server 1
instances managed by the clown ecosystem.
It owns a registry of running llama-server children in memory and
exposes an RPC surface to its clients.
.Pp
This page documents the control-plane architecture and the JSON-RPC
wire format.
For the daemon's CLI surface see
.Xr ringmaster 1 ;
for the CLI client that drives it from a terminal see
.Xr circus 1 .
.Sh ARCHITECTURE
The system is three processes:
.Bl -tag -width "ringmaster"
.It Nm ringmaster Pq Xr ringmaster 1
The daemon.
Listens on a Unix domain socket
.Pq see Sx CONTROL SOCKET ,
maintains a single-host in-memory registry of llama-server children,
and reaps them on exit.
Run by
.Xr launchd 8
or
.Xr systemd.user 5
under the
.Sq programs.ringmaster
home-manager module.
.It Xr circus 1
The CLI client.
Thin wrapper around the JSON-RPC client SDK.
Every subcommand
.Pq Cm start , stop , status , list , models
issues exactly one RPC and pretty-prints the result.
.Pq Cm download No is the exception \(em it still uses the in-process bubbletea progress UI against circusmodels.Download directly, not the RPC.
.It Xr llama-server 1
The actual inference engine.
Started by
.Nm
as a child process, identified by its
.Fl -alias .
Binds 127.0.0.1:<random-port> by default and serves the OpenAI-/Anthropic-
compatible HTTP API.
.El
.Pp
Clients
.Pq Xr circus 1 , Xr clown 1
talk only to
.Nm ;
they never start
.Xr llama-server 1
directly.
This loose-proxy split means clients see exactly one persistent
endpoint
.Pq Nm Ap s socket
while the underlying inference servers can come and go.
.Sh CONTROL SOCKET
.Nm
binds the path resolved from:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
The
.Fl -socket
flag on
.Cm ringmaster daemon
when present.
.It
The
.Ev RINGMASTER_SOCKET
environment variable when set.
.It
.Pa $HOME/.local/state/circus/control.sock
as the default.
.El
.Pp
Clients use
.Xr os.Stat 3
on the socket path before dialing, so a missing socket produces a
deterministic error path that points at the home-manager module rather
than a confusing
.Sq connect: invalid argument
on macOS
.Pq the kernel rejects nonexistent UNIX socket paths longer than 104 bytes with EINVAL, not ENOENT .
.Sh WIRE FORMAT
The control socket speaks newline-delimited JSON-RPC 2.0:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"ListInstances","params":{}}\(rsn
.Ed
.Pp
Each line is one envelope.
Response envelopes carry the same
.Sq id
as their request so a client serializing multiple in-flight requests
on the same connection can match them up.
The Go client SDK in
.Pa internal/ringmaster
mints sequential numeric IDs.
.Pp
Methods:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "MethodListAvailableModels" -compact
.It Sy MethodStartInstance
.It Sy MethodStopInstance
.It Sy MethodStopAll
.It Sy MethodListInstances
.It Sy MethodGetInstance
.It Sy MethodListAvailableModels
.It Sy MethodDownloadModel
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr ringmaster 1
for the per-method semantics.
.Sh JSON-RPC ERROR CODES
Codes follow JSON-RPC 2.0 §5.1.
.Nm
uses:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Sy -32601 Pa Method not found
The requested
.Sq method
is not implemented by the server.
.It Sy -32602 Pa Invalid params
The
.Sq params
payload could not be unmarshalled into the expected shape.
.It Sy -32603 Pa Internal error
Reserved for marshal failures on the server side.
.It Sy -32000 No through Sy -32099 Pa Server-defined application errors
.Nm
uses
.Sy -32000
for general application errors
.Pq launcher not configured, download failure, etc.
and
.Sy -32001
for
.Cm GetInstance
alias-not-found.
.El
.Sh INSTANCE LIFECYCLE
On
.Cm StartInstance :
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
Pick a free TCP port via
.Fn net.Listen :0
+ close.
.It
Resolve the
.Sq model
parameter to an absolute GGUF path
.Pq Pa $modelsDir/<name>.gguf No when not absolute .
.It
.Xr exec 3
.Xr llama-server 1
with
.Fl -port ,
.Fl -host ,
.Fl -alias ,
.Fl -model
plus any pass-through args.
SysProcAttr.Setpgid=true so the daemon can signal the entire
process group on Stop.
.It
Insert
.Pq under l.mu
the
.Sy child
record into
.Sq l.children Ns Bq alias .
.It
Call
.Fn reg.Add ;
on failure, roll back the children entry, SIGKILL the child, drain
its
.Sq exited
channel, return the error.
.It
Poll
.Pa /health
every 250 ms for up to 60 s.
On failure, SIGKILL + drain + error.
.It
Launch the single Wait-owner goroutine that calls
.Xr exec.Cmd.Wait 3 ,
populates
.Sq ch.waitErr ,
and closes
.Sq ch.exited .
.It
Launch the reaper goroutine which blocks on
.Sq ch.exited
and, under l.mu, removes the alias from both
.Sq l.children
and the registry if and only if
.Sq l.children Ns Bq alias == ch
.Pq the identity guard ensures Stop is the single owner of the cleanup when both fire concurrently .
.El
.Pp
On
.Cm StopInstance :
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
Under l.mu, look up and delete the
.Sq l.children
entry.
.It
.Xr kill 2
.Sy -pid Pq the process group No with Sy SIGTERM .
.It
Wait on
.Sq ch.exited
or 5 s of grace, whichever first.
.It
On timeout, SIGKILL and wait again
.Pq the Wait owner goroutine is guaranteed to close ch.exited eventually .
.It
.Fn reg.Remove
the alias.
.El
.Sh CAVEATS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Single-host only
The control socket is in
.Ev XDG_STATE_HOME
or
.Pa ~/.local/state .
Two users on the same host run two independent
.Nm
daemons; multi-host coordination is out of scope.
.It No backward compatibility
The pre-ringmaster
.Xr circus 1
used flat pid/port files under
.Pa ~/.local/state/circus/llama-server.{pid,port}
to track a single daemon.
These files are not read by current
.Nm Ap s
circus client; deleting them on upgrade is safe.
.It TOCTOU on free-port selection
.Nm Ap s
launcher binds
.Sq :0 ,
records the port, closes, then exec's
.Xr llama-server 1
with
.Fl -port .
A concurrent process can grab the freed port in between; the window
is narrow and the failure mode is a deterministic
.Sq listen: address already in use
from llama-server, which propagates as the
.Cm StartInstance
return error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ringmaster 1 ,
.Xr circus 1 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr llama-server 1 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7 ,
.Xr ringmaster-testing 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "amarbel, LLC"
