.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt RINGMASTER-TESTING 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ringmaster-testing
.Nd test pyramid for the ringmaster control plane
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This page documents the layered test strategy for
.Xr ringmaster 7 ,
.Xr ringmaster 1 ,
and
.Xr circus 1 .
Six layers, ordered from least to most expensive, each catching a
distinct class of regression.
Layers 1\(en4 are CI-gated through the pre-merge hook
.Pq Cm just No is the default verification: nix build + go test + bats ;
layers 5\(en6 are developer-invoked from the
.Xr justfile 1 .
.Sh LAYER 1: UNIT TESTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa internal/ringmaster/*_test.go
Wire format
.Pq Sy frame_test.go ,
registry semantics
.Pq Sy registry_test.go ,
control socket path resolution
.Pq Sy paths_test.go ,
and the Go client SDK
.Pq Sy client_test.go .
.El
.Pp
Wall time: <1 s. Runs as part of
.Cm go test ./...
under any conditions \(em no sandbox or binary requirements.
.Sh LAYER 2: INTEGRATION AGAINST GO FAKE
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa cmd/ringmaster/launcher_test.go
Exercises
.Sy newLauncher
.Pq spawn, /health poll, reap
against
.Pa cmd/ringmaster/testdata/fake-llama-server ,
a minimal Go HTTP stand-in that serves
.Pa /health
and
.Pa /v1/models .
The fake is rebuilt per test via
.Sy buildFakeLlamaServer .
.It Pa cmd/ringmaster/launcher_reap_test.go
SIGKILL-mid-test verifies the reaper-on-exit path: the registry
drains automatically when a child dies outside of
.Cm StopInstance .
.It Pa cmd/ringmaster/server_test.go
Drives the full dispatch surface
.Pq Sy ListInstances , StartInstance , StopInstance , GetInstance , StopAll , ListAvailableModels , DownloadModel
across a real Unix socket using the in-process
.Sy rm.Client
SDK.
.El
.Pp
Wall time: ~5 s. Catches launcher concurrency bugs, RPC dispatch
errors, JSON marshal regressions, and identity-guard races.
.Sh LAYER 3: END-TO-END AGAINST GO FAKE
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa zz-tests_bats/ringmaster.bats
Boots the production
.Xr ringmaster 1
daemon on a temp Unix socket, points its launcher at the same Go
fake fixture via
.Fl -llama-server ,
then drives the surface through the production
.Xr circus 1
CLI client
.Pq list / start / status / stop, with output assertions on the tabwriter columns and key:value status lines .
All tests share one daemon and serialize via
.Ev BATS_NO_PARALLELIZE_WITHIN_FILE .
.El
.Pp
Wall time: ~2 s. Catches CLI output drift, table formatting bugs,
status-not-found error code mapping, and any code path that only
manifests when ringmaster and circus are separate processes.
.Sh LAYER 4: REAL-BINARY, NO MODEL
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa cmd/ringmaster/launcher_real_test.go
Exercises
.Sy newLauncher
against the actual
.Sy buildcfg.LlamaServerPath ,
the
.Xr llama-server 1
binary burned in by the
.Sy nixpkgs-llama
flake input.
.Sy Model: ""
makes the launcher omit
.Fl -model ;
real llama-server enters "router mode" and serves
.Pa /health
in ~350 ms without loading any GGUF.
Stop, reap, and registry drain are all verified.
.It Pa cmd/ringmaster/launcher_version_test.go
Independent path-shape smoke that runs
.Sq llama-server --help
to confirm the burned-in path is reachable and executable.
Faster than the
.Sx LAYER 4
test
.Pq no /health poll
and useful as a first failure signal when a flake bump moves the
binary.
.El
.Pp
Both layer-4 tests skip when
.Sy buildcfg.LlamaServerPath
is empty
.Pq dev builds via Cm go build No / Cm go run \(em the nix derivation is the only thing that burns this in .
.Pp
Wall time: 0.3\(en0.5 s each in the nix sandbox.
Catches:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Dangling
.Pa /nix/store/.../bin/llama-server
references after a
.Sy nixpkgs-llama
input bump where the derivation moved.
.It
Arch mismatches
.Pq e.g. linux-builder produced aarch64-linux when the host is x86_64-linux .
.It
Missing runtime dylib deps that would only surface when the daemon
tried to start an instance.
.It
.Xr llama-server 1
argparser changes that would reject the
.Xr ringmaster 1
launcher's argv.
.El
.Pp
Does NOT catch:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Whether
.Pa /v1/messages
actually works against a real model.
That requires a GGUF and is covered by the developer smoke
.Pq Sx LAYER 5 .
.El
.Sh LAYER 5: DEVELOPER SMOKE (REAL MODEL)
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm just smoke-ringmaster Op Ar model-name
End-to-end against
.Pa ./result/bin/ringmaster ,
.Pa ./result/bin/circus ,
and a real GGUF from
.Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models/ .
Starts the daemon, runs every
.Xr circus 1
subcommand against a real
.Xr llama-server 1
loading a real model, posts to
.Pa /v1/messages ,
and asserts a content text field comes back in the response.
.Pp
Refuses to run if a daemon is already bound to the default control
socket
.Pq so it doesn't step on the user's home-manager-managed daemon .
Default model:
.Ar gemma3-1b
.Pq smallest registry-shipped GGUF .
.El
.Pp
Wall time: ~10 s
.Pq dominated by llama-cpp warmup + Metal init + a 64-token completion .
Catches: anything end-to-end that the upstream layers don't already
exercise.
The right verification when cutting a release.
.Pp
Not CI-suitable: requires a developer-installed GGUF
.Pq 1\(en2 GB, not in any flake closure
and a real GPU/CPU stack.
.Sh LAYER 6: FIELD-BUMP PROBE
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm just debug-probe-real-llama-server
Empirical probe that measures
.Xr llama-server 1 No Ap s
behaviour under
.Fl -version , Fl -help ,
and no-model launch.
Captures wallclock latency for each, the time-to-/health for the
no-model launch, and the stderr banner.
.El
.Pp
Used to source the evidence behind
.Sx LAYER 4 .
Re-run after a
.Sy nixpkgs-llama
flake input bump to confirm "router mode" still serves
.Pa /health
without a model.
If a future llama-cpp release removes router mode, the layer-4 test
would start hanging on the health poll \(em this probe is the
diagnostic tool for that.
.Sh WHEN TO REACH FOR EACH LAYER
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Adding a new RPC method
Layer 1
.Pq wire-format roundtrip in
.Pa internal/ringmaster/rpc_test.go
+ layer 2
.Pq server dispatch test in
.Pa cmd/ringmaster/server_test.go .
Layer 3 only if the new RPC has a circus CLI surface worth asserting on.
.It Changing launcher semantics
Layer 2
.Pq launcher_test.go against the Go fake .
Add a layer-4 case if the change interacts with
.Xr llama-server 1 Ap s
argv handling.
.It Bumping
.Sy nixpkgs-llama
Layer 4 covers the path-shape regressions.
After bumping, re-run layer 6 to confirm router-mode behaviour is
unchanged.
Before cutting a release, run layer 5 against your current GGUF set.
.It Changing the
.Xr circus 1
CLI output format
Layer 3
.Pq the bats e2e .
.It Investigating a "the daemon won't start" report
Layer 6 first
.Pq is the binary even runnable on this host? ,
then layer 5 with the user's exact model
.Pq is the round-trip working? .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ringmaster 1 ,
.Xr ringmaster 7 ,
.Xr circus 1 ,
.Xr llama-server 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "amarbel, LLC"
