.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CIRCUS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm circus
.Nd CLI client for the ringmaster llama-server control plane
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm start Ar model
.Op Fl -alias Ar name
.Op Fl -bind Ar addr
.Op Cm -- Ar passthrough\&...
.Nm
.Cm stop Ar alias
.Nm
.Cm status Op Ar alias
.Nm
.Cm list
.Nm
.Cm models
.Nm
.Cm download Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a thin CLI client of
.Xr ringmaster 1 .
Every subcommand other than
.Cm download
issues a single JSON-RPC call over the ringmaster control socket and
pretty-prints the result.
.Pp
A
.Xr ringmaster 1
daemon must be running before any
.Nm
subcommand other than
.Cm download
can complete.
The
.Sx programs.ringmaster
home-manager module starts and supervises it; users without
home-manager must invoke
.Cm ringmaster daemon
themselves.
.Pp
If the control socket is missing or refuses connections,
.Nm
prints a one-paragraph hint pointing at the home-manager module before
returning a non-zero exit code.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm start Ar model Op Fl -alias Ar name Op Fl -bind Ar addr Op Cm -- Ar passthrough\&...
Spawn a new llama-server child via ringmaster.
The required positional
.Ar model
is the bare name of a
.Pa .gguf
file under
.Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models
.Pq or an absolute path .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -alias Ar name
Registry key for the new instance.
Defaults to
.Ar model
when omitted.
Both
.Sq Fl -alias Ar name
and
.Sq Fl -alias Ns = Ns Ar name
parse.
.It Fl -bind Ar addr
Bind address for the spawned llama-server.
Defaults to
.Sq 127.0.0.1 .
Set to
.Sq 0.0.0.0
to bind every interface (e.g. for tailscale-reachable instances) or
to a specific tailnet IP.
.It Cm -- Ar passthrough\&...
Any args after
.Cm --
are forwarded to llama-server verbatim via the JSON-RPC
.Sq Args
field, e.g.
.Sq Fl -ctx-size 32768 .
.El
On success prints
.Sq circus: started <alias> at <bind>:<port> (pid <pid>) .
.It Cm stop Ar alias
Send SIGTERM to the named instance's process group via ringmaster, wait
up to five seconds, then SIGKILL.
Removes the entry from the registry.
.It Cm status Op Ar alias
Without
.Ar alias :
print a tabwriter table of every registered instance, or
.Sq circus: no instances running
when the registry is empty.
With
.Ar alias :
print one-key-per-line detail for the named instance, including
RFC 3339 start time and a humanized uptime.
.It Cm list
Same column set as
.Cm status ,
but silent on empty
.Pq exit code 0, zero bytes of output .
Use for scripted consumption; use
.Cm status
for interactive sessions.
.It Cm models
Print the names of every
.Pa *.gguf
file under
.Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models ,
one per line.
Backed by ringmaster's
.Cm ListAvailableModels
RPC so the same file is seen by both circus and clown.
.It Cm download Ar name
Fetch and verify a model from the baked-in registry, with a
bubbletea progress UI.
Does NOT go through ringmaster; uses
.Sy circusmodels.Download
directly because ringmaster's
.Cm DownloadModel
RPC is synchronous (no progress events on the wire) and not the
right surface for a terminal-attached invocation.
The downloaded file lands in
.Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models
where every other subcommand can see it.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev RINGMASTER_SOCKET
Override the control socket path
.Pq Pa ~/.local/state/circus/control.sock No by default .
Read by both
.Nm
and
.Xr ringmaster 1 ,
so setting it consistently is sufficient.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "~/.local/share/circus/models/*.gguf"
.It Pa ~/.local/state/circus/control.sock
Ringmaster control socket.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models/*.gguf
GGUF models visible to
.Cm models ,
.Cm start ,
and
.Cm download .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
The RPC completed successfully (or the early-exit validation passed
for read-only subcommands).
.It 1
The RPC failed, an argument was missing or unrecognized, or the
control socket was unreachable.
.Nm
prints a one-line diagnostic to stderr before exiting.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start a coder model with the default alias, bound to localhost:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ circus start qwen3-coder
circus: started qwen3-coder at 127.0.0.1:43219 (pid 91234)
.Ed
.Pp
Start a second instance of the same model with a longer context window
and a distinguishing alias:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ circus start qwen3-coder --alias coder-32k -- --ctx-size 32768
circus: started coder-32k at 127.0.0.1:43221 (pid 91241)
.Ed
.Pp
List what's running:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ circus list
ALIAS         MODEL         BIND       PORT   PID    UPTIME
coder-32k     qwen3-coder   127.0.0.1  43221  91241  12s
qwen3-coder   qwen3-coder   127.0.0.1  43219  91234  2m
.Ed
.Pp
Inspect a single instance with humanized uptime:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ circus status qwen3-coder
alias:      qwen3-coder
model:      qwen3-coder
bind:       127.0.0.1
port:       43219
pid:        91234
started:    2026-05-19T12:00:00Z (2m0s ago)
.Ed
.Pp
Stop one:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ circus stop coder-32k
circus: stopped coder-32k
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ringmaster 1 ,
.Xr ringmaster 7 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr llama-server 1
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Cm download
subcommand is the only one that does not go through ringmaster.
This is intentional: ringmaster's
.Cm DownloadModel
RPC is synchronous, and the bubbletea progress UI lives in
.Nm
because the model registry and HTTP fetch are
.Xr circusmodels 3
concerns that predate ringmaster.
Clown-side automation (planned in FDR-0011 / plan 2) does use the RPC
since clown is not terminal-attached.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "amarbel, LLC"
