.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Anthropic, PBC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CLAUDE-CODE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm claude
.Nd AI-powered coding assistant for the terminal
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar query
.Nm
.Fl p Ar query
.Op Fl -output-format Ar format
.Nm
.Fl c
.Op Fl p Ar query
.Nm
.Fl r Ar session-id
.Op Ar query
.Nm
.Cm update
.Nm
.Cm auth
.Ar subcommand
.Nm
.Cm mcp
.Ar subcommand
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm plugin
.Ar subcommand
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm agents
.Ar subcommand
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm auto-mode
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm remote-control
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm setup-token
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a command-line interface for interacting with Claude, Anthropic's AI
assistant, in the context of software development.
It provides an interactive REPL for conversations with Claude, with deep
integration into the local filesystem, shell, and development tools.
.Pp
When invoked without arguments,
.Nm
starts an interactive session.
When given a
.Ar query
argument, the query is sent as the initial user message.
.Pp
In print mode
.Pq Fl p ,
.Nm
sends a single query, prints the response to stdout, and exits.
This is designed for scripting and pipeline integration.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Ss Session Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl -continue
Continue the most recent conversation in the current directory.
When combined with
.Fl p ,
sends a follow-up message in print mode.
.It Fl r Ar session-id , Fl -resume Ar session-id
Resume a specific conversation by its session ID.
.It Fl -fork-session
When used with
.Fl c
or
.Fl r ,
fork the session instead of continuing it in-place.
Creates a new session branching from the existing conversation.
.It Fl -from-pr Ar pr-number
Start a session pre-loaded with context from the specified GitHub pull
request number.
.It Fl -session-id Ar id
Set a specific session ID for the conversation.
Useful for deterministic session management in automation.
.It Fl n Ar name , Fl -name Ar name
Assign a human-readable name to the session.
.It Fl -no-session-persistence
Do not persist the session to disk.
The conversation will be lost when the process exits.
.El
.Ss Output Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl p , Fl -print
Print mode.
Send a single query, print the response, and exit with a zero status on
success.
Designed for non-interactive use and shell pipelines.
Reads from stdin if no query argument is provided.
.It Fl -output-format Ar format
Set the output format for print mode.
Valid values:
.Bl -tag -width "stream-json" -compact
.It Cm text
Plain text output
.Pq default .
.It Cm json
Single JSON object with the final response.
.It Cm stream-json
Newline-delimited JSON objects streamed as they arrive.
.El
.It Fl -input-format Ar format
Set the input format when reading from stdin.
Used to pass structured conversation history.
.It Fl -json-schema Ar schema
Provide a JSON schema that the model's output must conform to.
Enables structured output mode.
.It Fl -include-partial-messages
In streaming JSON output, include partial message objects as they are
assembled.
.It Fl -include-hook-events
In streaming JSON output, include hook execution events.
.It Fl -replay-user-messages
In streaming JSON output, replay user messages in the stream.
.It Fl -verbose
Enable verbose output, showing additional diagnostic information.
.It Fl v , Fl -version
Print the version of
.Nm
and exit.
.El
.Ss Model Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -model Ar name
Select the model to use.
Accepts shorthand names
.Pq Cm sonnet , Cm opus
or fully-qualified model identifiers.
.It Fl -fallback-model Ar name
Specify a fallback model to use if the primary model is unavailable or
returns an error.
.It Fl -effort Ar level
Set the reasoning effort level.
Valid values:
.Cm low ,
.Cm medium ,
.Cm high ,
.Cm max .
Higher effort levels use more tokens for reasoning but may produce
better results for complex tasks.
.El
.Ss System Prompt Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -system-prompt Ar text
Replace the default system prompt with the specified text.
.It Fl -system-prompt-file Ar path
Replace the default system prompt with the contents of the specified
file.
.It Fl -append-system-prompt Ar text
Append text to the default system prompt.
The default prompt is preserved; the additional text is added after it.
.It Fl -append-system-prompt-file Ar path
Append the contents of the specified file to the default system prompt.
.It Fl -exclude-dynamic-system-prompt-sections
Exclude dynamically-generated system prompt sections such as git status,
file listings, and other context that is normally injected at session
start.
.El
.Ss Permission Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -permission-mode Ar mode
Set the permission mode for tool use.
Valid values:
.Bl -tag -width "bypassPermissions" -compact
.It Cm default
Prompt the user for each tool invocation not covered by allow/deny
rules.
.It Cm acceptEdits
Automatically accept file edits but prompt for other tools.
.It Cm plan
Read-only mode.
Claude can read files and search but cannot make changes.
.It Cm auto
Automatically approve most tool uses with safety checks.
.It Cm dontAsk
Approve all tool uses without prompting.
.It Cm bypassPermissions
Skip all permission checks entirely.
Requires
.Fl -allow-dangerously-skip-permissions .
.El
.It Fl -dangerously-skip-permissions
Skip all permission checks.
Requires acknowledgment via
.Fl -allow-dangerously-skip-permissions .
This is inherently unsafe and should only be used in sandboxed
environments.
.It Fl -allow-dangerously-skip-permissions
Acknowledge and enable the
.Fl -dangerously-skip-permissions
flag.
Both flags must be present for permission bypass to take effect.
.It Fl -enable-auto-mode
Allow Claude to escalate to auto-mode during a session when it
determines it would be beneficial.
.It Fl -permission-prompt-tool Ar tool-name
Specify an external tool to use for permission prompts instead of the
built-in terminal UI.
Enables headless or custom permission workflows.
.El
.Ss Tool Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -allowedTools Ar pattern ...
Specify glob patterns for tools that should be allowed without
prompting.
May be specified multiple times.
Example:
.Fl -allowedTools Qq mcp__moxy__*
.It Fl -disallowedTools Ar pattern ...
Specify glob patterns for tools that should be denied.
May be specified multiple times.
Takes precedence over
.Fl -allowedTools .
.It Fl -tools Ar json
Provide a JSON array of custom tool definitions.
.El
.Ss MCP and Plugin Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -mcp-config Ar path
Path to an MCP server configuration file.
See the
.Sx FILES
section for the default location.
.It Fl -strict-mcp-config
Fail immediately if any MCP server in the configuration fails to
connect, rather than continuing with degraded functionality.
.It Fl -plugin-dir Ar path
Load a plugin from the specified directory.
The directory must contain a
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json
manifest.
May be specified multiple times.
.It Fl -disable-slash-commands
Disable slash command processing in interactive mode.
.El
.Ss Working Directory Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -add-dir Ar path
Add an additional directory to the session's working context.
Claude will be aware of files in these directories.
May be specified multiple times.
.It Fl w , Fl -worktree
Create a git worktree for the session.
Isolates file changes from the main working tree.
.It Fl -tmux
Run the session inside a new tmux window.
.El
.Ss Agent Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -agent Ar name
Use a named agent configuration.
Agents define specialized behaviors, tools, and system prompts.
.It Fl -agents Ar json
Provide agent configurations as a JSON object.
.It Fl -teammate-mode Ar mode
Control how subagents are spawned.
Valid values:
.Bl -tag -width "in-process" -compact
.It Cm auto
Let Claude decide based on task complexity.
.It Cm in-process
Run subagents in the same process.
.It Cm tmux
Spawn subagents in separate tmux panes.
.El
.El
.Ss Limit Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -max-turns Ar n
Limit the conversation to at most
.Ar n
assistant turns.
When the limit is reached, the session ends.
Useful for automated workflows.
.It Fl -max-budget-usd Ar amount
Set a maximum spending budget in US dollars for the session.
The session will stop when the budget is exhausted.
.El
.Ss Remote Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -remote
Run in remote mode, connecting to a remote
.Nm
instance.
.It Fl -remote-control , Fl -rc
Enable remote control mode, allowing external processes to send commands
to the running session.
.It Fl -remote-control-session-name-prefix Ar prefix
Set a prefix for the remote control session name.
.It Fl -teleport
Enable teleport mode for remote sessions.
.El
.Ss Initialization Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -init
Initialize a new project configuration in the current directory.
Creates
.Pa .claude/settings.json
and optionally
.Pa CLAUDE.md .
.It Fl -init-only
Perform initialization and exit without starting a session.
.It Fl -maintenance
Run in maintenance mode for automated upkeep tasks.
.It Fl -bare
Start with minimal configuration, skipping project detection and
context loading.
.El
.Ss Debug Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -debug Op Ar category
Enable debug logging.
An optional category filter limits output to matching categories.
Debug output is written to stderr unless
.Fl -debug-file
is specified.
.It Fl -debug-file Ar path
Write debug output to the specified file instead of stderr.
.El
.Ss Settings Options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -settings Ar json
Provide settings as a JSON string, overriding file-based settings.
.It Fl -setting-sources Ar json
Provide a JSON object specifying the source of each setting for
diagnostic purposes.
.El
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width "remote-control"
.It Cm update
Update
.Nm
to the latest version.
.It Cm auth Cm login | Cm logout | Cm status | Cm switch
Manage authentication.
.Cm login
initiates an OAuth flow or accepts an API key.
.Cm logout
clears stored credentials.
.Cm status
shows the current authentication state.
.Cm switch
changes the active authentication profile.
.It Cm mcp Cm list | Cm add | Cm remove | Cm serve
Manage MCP (Model Context Protocol) server connections.
.Cm list
shows configured servers.
.Cm add
registers a new server.
.Cm remove
deletes a server configuration.
.Cm serve
starts
.Nm
as an MCP server itself.
.It Cm plugin Cm install | Cm uninstall | Cm list | Cm update
Manage plugins.
.Cm install
adds a plugin from a directory or marketplace.
.Cm uninstall
removes a plugin.
.Cm list
shows installed plugins.
.Cm update
refreshes plugin manifests.
.It Cm agents Cm list | Cm show
Inspect available agent configurations.
.Cm list
shows all agents.
.Cm show
displays details of a specific agent.
.It Cm auto-mode
Configure or enter auto-mode, which allows Claude to approve its own
tool uses with safety guardrails.
.It Cm remote-control
Start or manage remote control sessions.
Allows external processes to programmatically interact with a running
.Nm
session via JSON messages.
.It Cm setup-token
Configure an authentication token non-interactively.
Designed for CI/CD and automated provisioning.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
See
.Xr claude-code-env 7
for a comprehensive list of environment variables.
Key variables include:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
API key for direct Anthropic API access.
.It Ev ANTHROPIC_MODEL
Override the default model.
.It Ev CLAUDE_CODE_SHELL
Override the shell used for Bash tool invocations.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.claude/settings.json
User-level settings.
Applies to all projects.
See
.Xr claude-code-settings 5 .
.It Pa .claude/settings.json
Project-level settings.
Checked into version control.
Shared with all collaborators.
.It Pa .claude/settings.local.json
Local project settings.
Not checked into version control.
Overrides project settings.
.It Pa ~/.claude.json
Global configuration for UI preferences, editor integration, and
behavioral defaults.
.It Pa .mcp.json
MCP server configuration for the project.
Defines servers available during sessions in this directory.
.It Pa CLAUDE.md
Project instructions file.
Loaded into the system prompt at session start.
Searched for in the current directory and parent directories.
.It Pa ~/.claude/CLAUDE.md
User-level instructions.
Appended to the system prompt for all sessions.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Pp
In print mode, a non-zero exit status indicates that the query could
not be completed successfully.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start an interactive session:
.Dl $ claude
.Pp
Ask a question in print mode:
.Dl $ claude -p \(dqExplain the error in main.go\(dq
.Pp
Continue the last conversation:
.Dl $ claude -c
.Pp
Pipe input and get JSON output:
.Dl $ cat error.log | claude -p \(dqDiagnose this error\(dq --output-format json
.Pp
Start a session with a specific model and budget:
.Dl $ claude --model opus --max-budget-usd 5.00 \(dqRefactor the auth module\(dq
.Pp
Run in fully automated mode inside a sandbox:
.Dl $ claude -p \(dqFix all lint errors\(dq --dangerously-skip-permissions --allow-dangerously-skip-permissions
.Pp
Resume a specific session:
.Dl $ claude -r abc123-def456 \(dqContinue where we left off\(dq
.Pp
Start with a git worktree:
.Dl $ claude -w \(dqWork on the feature branch\(dq
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code-hooks 5 ,
.Xr claude-code-settings 5 ,
.Xr claude-code-env 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Anthropic , PBC
