.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CLOWN-STDIO-BRIDGE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown-stdio-bridge
.Nd bridge a stdio MCP server to streamable-HTTP for clown-plugin-host
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Fl -command Ar cmd
.Cm --
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
wraps a JSON-RPC-over-stdio MCP server and exposes it on an ephemeral
loopback HTTP port speaking the streamable-HTTP MCP transport.
The wrapped server is spawned as a child process; its stdin and stdout
are driven by
.Nm Ap s
translator goroutines.
.Pp
.Nm
is launched by
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
as the synthesized command for any
.Li stdioServers
entry in
.Xr clown-json 5 .
Plugin authors do not invoke
.Nm
directly; they declare a stdio MCP server in
.Pa clown.json
and clown desugars it into a
.Li httpServers
entry pointing at this binary.
The desugaring lets stdio-declared servers and native HTTP servers share
a single discovery and lifecycle path under
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 .
.Pp
On launch
.Nm
prints the same handshake line as a native clown-plugin server (see
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7 ) ,
binds
.Li 127.0.0.1:0 ,
and serves
.Li GET /healthz
and
.Li {GET,POST,DELETE} /mcp .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -command Ar cmd
The wrapped stdio MCP server binary.
Resolved against the caller's
.Ev PATH
via
.Xr execvp 3 ;
absolute paths bypass lookup.
Required.
.It Cm --
Separator between
.Nm
flags and the wrapped command's argv.
Everything after
.Cm --
is taken verbatim as the wrapped command's arguments, including any
literal
.Cm --
tokens.
.El
.Sh PROTOCOL TRANSLATION
.Nm
implements a subset of the streamable-HTTP MCP transport sufficient to
bridge a stdio MCP server with no client-side awareness:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li POST /mcp Pq JSON-RPC request
The body is forwarded verbatim, followed by a newline, to the wrapped
child's stdin.
.Nm
waits for a JSON-RPC response with the matching
.Li id
on the child's stdout.
By default the response is delivered as a
.Li text/event-stream
.Pq SSE
whose terminal
.Li data:
event carries the JSON-RPC response, with periodic keep-alive heartbeats
emitted while the call is in flight
.Pq see Sx ENVIRONMENT .
When streaming is disabled
.Pq Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL Ns = Ns Li 0
the response is instead a synchronous
.Li application/json
body.
.It Li POST /mcp Pq JSON-RPC notification or response
The body is forwarded fire-and-forget; the HTTP layer responds with
.Li 202 Accepted
immediately.
.It Li GET /mcp
Opens a Server-Sent Events stream.
Server-initiated JSON-RPC messages from the wrapped child
.Pq i.e., lines on its stdout that have a Li method No field but no matching pending Li id
are broadcast to every active SSE subscriber as
.Li data:\& Ns Ar payload
events.
.It Li DELETE /mcp
Returns
.Li 405 Method Not Allowed .
Session termination is not supported in v1; the bridge does not assign
session IDs.
.El
.Pp
The
.Li Origin
header is restricted to loopback origins
.Pq Li 127.0.0.1 , Li ::1 , Li localhost
or absent, per the streamable-HTTP spec's DNS-rebinding mitigation.
Other origins receive
.Li 403 Forbidden .
.Sh RESOURCE LIMITS
.Nm
caps the number of pending JSON-RPC messages in each direction at a
fixed depth.
On overflow:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Inbound Pq HTTP No -> child stdin
The offending HTTP request receives a JSON-RPC error response with code
.Li \-32000
and message
.Dq clown-stdio-bridge: inbound queue saturated .
The wrapped child stays alive.
.It Sy Outbound Pq child stdout No -> SSE subscriber
The oldest pending broadcast in the offending subscriber's channel is
dropped to make room.
A counter
.Pq exposed via Sy DroppedOutbound
records the cumulative drop count.
.El
.Pp
The depth is a tuning parameter and may change between minor versions.
.Sh CRASH BEHAVIOR
If the wrapped child exits unexpectedly,
.Nm
logs the exit status and itself exits non-zero.
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 Ap s
existing failure path
.Pq Li StartReport.Failed , Fl -skip-failed
handles restart-or-abort.
.Nm
is a transport adapter, not a supervisor.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
On
.Dv SIGTERM
or
.Dv SIGINT ,
.Nm
sends
.Dv SIGTERM
to the wrapped child's process group, waits up to 5 seconds for clean
exit, then escalates to
.Dv SIGKILL .
The HTTP server is gracefully shut down on the same path.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL
Cadence of the keep-alive heartbeats emitted on streaming
.Li POST /mcp
responses while the bridge waits for the wrapped child's reply.
Parsed by
.Xr time.ParseDuration 3 .
Default:
.Li 30s .
The values
.Li 0 ,
.Li off ,
and the empty string disable streaming entirely: the response falls back
to a synchronous
.Li application/json
body, and child notifications are not forwarded on that POST.
A negative or unparseable value is ignored in favor of the default.
.It Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_HEARTBEAT
Named heartbeat mode that overrides the interval-derived policy.
The recognized value
.Li forward-only
.Pq alias Li child
keeps streaming and child-notification forwarding on but suppresses the
bridge's own timer, so keep-alive becomes
.Em activity-driven \(em
carried solely by the wrapped child's own
.Li notifications/progress .
This lets a genuinely silent child time out instead of being held open
indefinitely by a blind timer.
Unset or any unrecognized value falls back to the
.Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL
cadence.
.It Ev STATSD_HOST , Ev STATSD_PORT
Destination for the bridge's statsd metrics (stats-me), fire-and-forget
UDP.
Defaults:
.Li 127.0.0.1
and
.Li 8125 .
Every bridged JSON-RPC request emits, under
.Li clown.bridge.<server>.<label>. \(em
where
.Li <server>
comes from
.Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_SERVER_NAME
and
.Li <label>
is the tool name for
.Li tools/call
.Pq else the JSON-RPC method ,
both sanitized to
.Li [A-Za-z0-9_-] \(em
a
.Li .duration
timer
.Pq Li |ms , No on completed responses
plus exactly one outcome counter
.Pq Li |c :
.Li .success ,
.Li .failure
.Pq JSON-RPC error response, bridge error, or queue-full ,
or
.Li .abandoned
.Pq client disconnected before a response .
Emission never blocks or fails the request path; when nothing listens the
datagrams are simply dropped.
.It Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_STATSD
When set to
.Li 1 ,
disables statsd emission entirely.
.It Ev CLOWN_BRIDGE_SERVER_NAME
Logical name of the bridged server, used as the statsd metric prefix
segment.
Set automatically by
.Nm clown Ns 's
.Fa stdioServers
desugaring
.Pq see Xr clown-json 5 ;
defaults to
.Li unknown
when unset.
.El
.Pp
For how these heartbeats interact with Claude Code's per-tool
.Fa timeout ,
see the
.Dq Request Timeout Regimes
section of
.Xr clown-json 5 .
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits
.Li 0
on a clean
.Dv SIGTERM Ns / Ns Dv SIGINT
shutdown after spawning the wrapped child successfully.
Exit status
.Li 1
indicates an error reachable before or during the wrapped child's
lifetime: missing or invalid flags, command lookup failure, network
listen failure, HTTP serve error, or unexpected child exit.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 ,
.Xr clown-json 5 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
