.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CLOWN-PLUGIN-HOST 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown-plugin-host
.Nd lifecycle manager for HTTP MCP servers in clown plugins
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl -plugin-dir Ar dir
.Ar ...
.Op Fl -skip-failed
.Op Fl -disable-clown-protocol
.Op Fl v | Fl -verbose
.Cm --
.Ar command
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
scans plugin directories for
.Xr clown-json 5
manifests declaring HTTP-based MCP servers, launches them as child
processes, waits for their handshake and health checks, compiles
replacement plugin manifests with URL-based MCP entries for the running
servers, and passes the compiled plugin directories to the downstream
command.
.Pp
When no
.Pa clown.json
files are found in any plugin directory,
.Nm
exec's directly into the downstream command with zero overhead.
.Pp
.Nm
is a standalone binary retained for backward compatibility.
As of clown 0.3.0, the
.Xr clown 1
binary directly manages the plugin server lifecycle using the same
.Nm internal/pluginhost
library, eliminating the exec hop to
.Nm .
Direct invocation of
.Nm
remains functional for external tooling that depends on it.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -plugin-dir Ar dir
Add
.Ar dir
to the list of plugin directories to scan for
.Pa clown.json
manifests.
May be specified multiple times.
.It Fl -skip-failed
Continue with only the plugin servers that started healthy when one or
more servers fail to launch, hand shake, or become healthy within their
timeout.
Without this flag,
.Nm
fails closed on any server failure when run non-interactively.
On an interactive terminal, the same effect can be selected at runtime
via the confirmation prompt described in
.Sx FAILURE HANDLING .
Also settable via the
.Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS
environment variable (see
.Sx ENVIRONMENT ) .
.It Fl -disable-clown-protocol
Bypass the clown-plugin-host pipeline entirely.
No
.Pa clown.json
discovery, no HTTP server launch, and no plugin manifest compilation.
Plugin directories are passed to the downstream command unmodified via
.Fl -plugin-dir ,
so claude's native plugin loader (and its native MCP registration) is
the only path active.
Useful as an escape hatch when debugging, or when the user explicitly
prefers native claude behavior.
Also settable via the
.Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_CLOWN_PROTOCOL
environment variable (see
.Sx ENVIRONMENT ) .
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Emit informational progress on stderr in addition to the log file (the
log captures everything regardless; see
.Sx LOGGING ) .
Without this flag
.Nm
runs quietly: only errors, failure summaries, and the interactive
plugin-failure confirmation prompt are written to stderr.
Plugin servers' own stderr output is always captured into the log but
only mirrored to the terminal in verbose mode.
The startup
.Dq logging to <path>
breadcrumb and
.Dq launching N HTTP MCP server(s)
progress line are also gated behind this flag.
.It Cm --
Separates
.Nm
flags from the downstream command.
Everything after
.Cm --
is treated as the command to exec (typically
.Xr claude-code 1 ) .
.El
.Sh SERVER LIFECYCLE
For each HTTP server declared in a discovered
.Pa clown.json :
.Bl -enum
.It
The server command is launched as a child process in its own process
group
.Pq via Dv setpgid .
.It
The first line of the server's stdout is read as a handshake line
(see
.Sx HANDSHAKE PROTOCOL ) .
.It
.Nm
polls the server's health endpoint until it returns HTTP 200 or the
configured timeout elapses.
.It
Once all servers are healthy, the plugin manifest is compiled with
URL-based MCP entries for the running servers (see
.Sx PLUGIN MANIFEST COMPILATION ) .
.El
.Pp
When the downstream command exits,
.Nm
sends
.Dv SIGTERM
to each server's process group, waits up to 5 seconds for graceful
shutdown, then sends
.Dv SIGKILL
if necessary.
.Nm
exits with the downstream command's exit code.
.Sh HANDSHAKE PROTOCOL
Each HTTP MCP server MUST print a single pipe-delimited line to stdout
before serving requests:
.Pp
.Dl 1|1|tcp|127.0.0.1:54321|streamable-http
.Pp
The fields are:
.Bl -column "Field" "Name" "Values" -offset indent
.It Sy Field Ta Sy Name Ta Sy Values
.It 0 Ta Core protocol version Ta Must be Li 1
.It 1 Ta App protocol version Ta Integer (reserved, must be Li 1 )
.It 2 Ta Network type Ta Must be Li tcp
.It 3 Ta Network address Ta Ar host Ns Li \&: Ns Ar port
.It 4 Ta Protocol Ta Li streamable-http No or Li sse
.El
.Pp
This protocol is modeled on hashicorp/go-plugin.
The server MUST bind to
.Li 127.0.0.1:0
(ephemeral port), write the handshake line, flush stdout, then begin
serving.
.Sh PLUGIN MANIFEST COMPILATION
For each plugin directory whose
.Pa clown.json
contributes at least one HTTP MCP server,
.Nm
.Em compiles
a replacement plugin manifest that replaces the original stdio-based
.Li mcpServers
entries with URL-based entries pointing at the running HTTP servers.
This preserves plugin identity and original server names in Claude Code
while switching the transport from stdio to HTTP.
.Pp
Compilation steps for each plugin directory:
.Bl -enum
.It
Create a staging directory under the OS temp root
.Pq Pa /tmp/clown-plugin-compile-* .
.It
Symlink every top-level entry of the source plugin directory (other than
.Pa .claude-plugin )
into the staging directory.
.It
Create a real
.Pa .claude-plugin/
directory in the staging dir and symlink every file under it other than
.Pa plugin.json .
.It
Read the source
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json ,
replace the
.Li mcpServers
key with URL-based entries for the healthy HTTP servers, and write the
result to the staged
.Pa plugin.json .
Each injected entry carries a
.Li type
discriminator
.Pq Li http No or Li sse
and a
.Li url
pointing at the server's loopback address and port.
Server names match the original keys from
.Pa clown.json .
.El
.Pp
Claude Code is handed the staged directory via
.Fl -plugin-dir
instead of the original, so hooks, skills, commands, agents, and
sub-agents still load normally and MCP servers appear as plugin-sourced
with their original names.
The original plugin directory is never modified.
.Pp
Plugin directories that have no
.Pa clown.json
(or where
.Pa clown.json
declares no servers) are passed to Claude Code unmodified, so their
native MCP registration continues to work.
.Pp
Compiled staging directories are tracked by the host and removed during
shutdown.
.Fl -disable-clown-protocol
skips compilation entirely; see
.Sx OPTIONS .
.Sh MCP CONFIGURATION
MCP server entries are injected directly into the compiled
.Pa plugin.json
.Pq see Sx PLUGIN MANIFEST COMPILATION
rather than a standalone configuration file.
Server names in the compiled manifest use the original keys from
.Pa clown.json ,
preserving hook matching and Claude Code's
.Li plugin:<name>:<server>
identity scheme.
.Pp
Each entry carries a
.Li type
discriminator required by Claude Code's MCP configuration schema:
.Li http
for
.Li streamable-http
servers (URL path
.Pa /mcp )
and
.Li sse
for
.Li sse
servers (URL path
.Pa /sse ) .
.Sh FAILURE HANDLING
Plugin servers that fail to start, fail the handshake, or fail the
healthcheck are reported individually: each failure is written to stderr
and to the log file (see
.Sx LOGGING ) .
.Nm
then decides how to proceed based on context:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -skip-failed No or Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS Ns = Ns Li 1
.Nm
continues with only the healthy servers.
If no servers came up healthy,
.Nm
exec's the downstream command directly, as if no
.Pa clown.json
had been discovered.
.It Interactive Pq both stdin and stderr are terminals
.Nm
renders a confirmation prompt listing the failed servers and their
errors, with the choice to continue with the healthy subset or abort.
Continuing is equivalent to
.Fl -skip-failed .
.It Non-interactive, no opt-in
.Nm
shuts down any healthy servers and exits with status 1.
This is the default and preserves backwards compatibility.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS
When set to
.Li 1 ,
behaves the same as passing
.Fl -skip-failed .
.It Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_CLOWN_PROTOCOL
When set to
.Li 1 ,
behaves the same as passing
.Fl -disable-clown-protocol .
.It Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
Base directory for the log file (see
.Sx LOGGING ) .
When unset or empty, defaults to
.Pa $HOME/.local/log ,
per the XDG base directory specification.
.It Ev HOME
Consulted only when
.Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
is unset or empty, to resolve the default log directory.
.El
.Sh LOGGING
.Nm
writes a per-invocation log file to
.Pa $XDG_LOG_HOME/clown/
(default
.Pa $HOME/.local/log/clown/ ) .
The filename has the form
.Pa clown-plugin-host- Ns Ar UTC-timestamp Ns Pa - Ns Ar pid Ns Pa .log ,
e.g.
.Pa clown-plugin-host-20260422T153012Z-12345.log .
.Pp
The log uses the Go
.Xr slog 3
text format
.Pq Li key=value , one record per line
and captures:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Startup arguments, resolved plugin directories, and the effective
skip-failed policy.
.It
Per-server lifecycle events: start, handshake fields, health-check
result, and graceful or forced shutdown.
.It
Each line of every managed server's stderr, tagged with the server
name.
The same lines continue to be mirrored to
.Nm Ap s
stderr with a
.Li [plugin/server]
prefix for the current terminal session.
.It
Signals received and forwarded to the downstream command, and the
downstream's exit status.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
prints the absolute path of the log file to stderr on startup so a
concurrent
.Xr tail 1
is easy to start.
.Pp
Log files are never rotated or pruned by
.Nm .
Deleting old files is safe; the XDG specification guarantees that log
deletion does not affect application correctness.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa $XDG_LOG_HOME/clown/clown-plugin-host-*.log
Per-invocation log files.
See
.Sx LOGGING .
.It Pa $HOME/.local/log/clown/clown-plugin-host-*.log
Default location when
.Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
is unset.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
exits with the downstream command's exit code when it runs the
downstream successfully.
Exit status
.Li 1
indicates a host-level failure before the downstream was invoked:
missing downstream command, invalid flags, discovery error, or plugin
server failure that was not skipped (see
.Sx FAILURE HANDLING ) .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-json 5 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
