.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CLOWN 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown
.Nd coding-agent wrapper with prompt injection and plugin loading
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar query
.Nm
.Cm version
.Nm
.Fl -provider Ar name
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Fl -naked
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a Go binary that wraps
.Xr claude-code 1
with system prompt injection, managed security settings, plugin
lifecycle management, and parameterized plugin loading.
All unrecognized arguments are forwarded to the underlying provider CLI.
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
disables a configurable set of Claude built-in tools (see
.Sx DISALLOWED TOOLS
below) and auto-mode, injects hierarchical system prompts from
.Pa .circus/
directories, launches HTTP MCP servers declared in plugin
.Xr clown-json 5
manifests, and loads Claude Code plugins specified at build time.
.Pp
.Nm
directly manages the plugin server lifecycle that was previously
delegated to a separate
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
process.
The standalone
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1
binary remains available for backward compatibility.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm version
Print version information for all components (clown, claude-code, codex,
and loaded plugins) and exit.
.It Fl -provider Ar name
Select the provider CLI.
Valid values are
.Cm claude
(default),
.Cm codex ,
and
.Cm opencode .
Can also be set via the
.Ev CLOWN_PROVIDER
environment variable.
.It Fl -naked
Bypass all clown wrapping (prompt injection, plugin loading, tool
restrictions) and exec the provider CLI directly.
Not supported with
.Cm --provider opencode .
.It Fl -skip-failed
When any discovered HTTP MCP plugin server fails to start,
.Nm
proceeds with only the healthy subset instead of aborting.
Also settable via the
.Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS
environment variable.
.It Fl -disable-clown-protocol
Bypass the plugin server pipeline entirely: no
.Pa clown.json
discovery, no HTTP MCP server launch, and no plugin manifest
compilation.
Plugin directories are passed to Claude Code unmodified so claude's
native plugin loader (and its native MCP registration) is the only path
active.
Intended as an escape hatch for debugging or when native claude behavior
is preferred.
Also settable via the
.Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_CLOWN_PROTOCOL
environment variable.
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose
Emit informational progress on stderr in addition to the always-on
log file.
Without this flag, only errors, failure summaries, and the interactive
plugin-failure prompt are written to stderr; plugin servers' own
stderr output is captured to the log but not mirrored to the terminal.
.El
.Sh SYSTEM PROMPT INJECTION
.Nm
walks from
.Ev PWD
up to
.Ev HOME ,
collecting
.Pa .circus/
directories at each level.
.Ss Replace mode
If any directory contains
.Pa .circus/system-prompt ,
the deepest one replaces Claude's system prompt entirely via
.Fl -system-prompt-file .
.Ss Append mode
All
.Pa *.md
files found in
.Pa .circus/system-prompt.d/
directories are concatenated shallowest-first and appended to the
system prompt via
.Fl -append-system-prompt-file .
Builtin fragments shipped with
.Nm
are always prepended before user fragments.
.Sh PLUGINS
.Nm
ships with zero default plugins.
Consumers supply plugin flake inputs via
.Fn mkCircus
at build time (see
.Sx NIX INTERFACE
below).
Each plugin directory is passed to
.Xr claude-code 1
via
.Fl -plugin-dir .
.Pp
A plugin directory must contain
.Pa .claude-plugin/plugin.json
with at minimum a
.Fa name
field.
See
.Xr claude-code-settings 5
for the full plugin manifest schema.
.Ss HTTP MCP Servers
Plugins may also declare HTTP-based MCP servers in a
.Pa clown.json
manifest (see
.Xr clown-json 5 ) .
These servers are automatically launched and managed by
.Nm
directly: it scans plugin directories for
.Pa clown.json ,
launches declared servers, reads their handshake, polls health endpoints,
compiles replacement plugin manifests with URL-based MCP entries, and
passes the compiled directories to the provider CLI.
HTTP transport enables features unavailable over stdio, including
.Li notifications/tools/list_changed
and server-initiated requests.
.Sh NIX INTERFACE
.Nm
exports
.Fn lib.${system}.mkCircus
within its flake outputs.
This function accepts a single attribute set:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mkCircus {
  plugins = [
    { flake = moxy; dirs = [ "share/purse-first/moxy" ]; }
    { flake = bob;  dirs = [ "share/purse-first/*" ]; }
  ];
}
.Ed
.Pp
Each element in
.Fa plugins
is an attribute set with two fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa flake
The plugin's flake input value.
Used to resolve the default package and extract revision metadata.
.It Fa dirs
A list of paths relative to the flake's default package output.
Each entry is either a literal path to a plugin directory or a glob
pattern.
Glob characters
.Pq Li * , Li \&? , Li \&[
trigger shell expansion at build time; non-plugin directories in
the expansion are silently skipped.
A glob that matches zero valid plugins fails the build.
.El
.Pp
The function returns an attribute set containing:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa packages.default
The
.Nm
wrapper with plugins burned in.
.It Fa devShells.default
Development shell.
.It Fa checks
Build-time validation tests.
.El
.Ss Consumer example
.Bd -literal -offset indent
{
  inputs = {
    clown.url = "github:amarbel-llc/clown";
    moxy.url = "github:amarbel-llc/moxy";
    bob.url = "github:amarbel-llc/bob";
  };

  outputs = { clown, moxy, bob, ... }:
    let
      system = "aarch64-darwin";
      circus = clown.lib.${system}.mkCircus {
        plugins = [
          { flake = moxy; dirs = [ "share/purse-first/moxy" ]; }
          { flake = bob;  dirs = [ "share/purse-first/*" ]; }
        ];
      };
    in {
      packages.${system}.default = circus.packages.default;
    };
}
.Ed
.Sh DISALLOWED TOOLS
.Nm
passes
.Fl -disallowed-tools
flags to the provider CLI, preventing use of a build-time configurable
set of Claude built-in tools.
The list is read from a file baked into the Nix derivation.
The default set disables tools that are redundant with MCP-based
replacements provided by plugins (e.g.\&
.Nm moxy ) :
.Pp
.Bl -column "EnterWorktree" "Replacement" -compact
.It Sy Tool Ta Sy Replacement
.It Li Bash(*) Ta moxy tools
.It Li Agent(Explore) Ta \(em
.It Li Glob Ta folio.glob
.It Li Grep Ta rg.search
.It Li LSP Ta lux
.It Li Write Ta folio.write
.It Li WebFetch Ta chrest.web-fetch
.It Li WebSearch Ta \(em
.It Li EnterWorktree Ta spinclass
.It Li NotebookEdit Ta \(em
.It Li PowerShell Ta \(em
.El
.Pp
To bypass all disallowed tools (and all other clown wrapping), use
.Fl -naked .
.Sh MANAGED SETTINGS
.Nm
patches the upstream
.Xr claude-code 1
bundle to read managed settings from a path under its own Nix store
output instead of
.Pa /etc/claude-code .
The shipped managed settings enforce:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Cm disableAutoMode : \(lqdisable\(rq
.It
.Cm disableBypassPermissionsMode : \(lqdisable\(rq
.It
A deny list for destructive Bash patterns
.Pq Li "rm -rf *" , Li "sudo *" , Li "curl * | sh" , Li "wget * | sh"
.El
.Pp
These sit at the highest precedence tier; neither user settings nor CLI
flags can override them.
See
.Xr claude-code-settings 5
for the precedence chain.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLOWN_PROVIDER
Default provider CLI.
Overridden by
.Fl -provider .
Valid values:
.Cm claude
(default),
.Cm codex ,
.Cm opencode .
.It Ev CLOWN_SKIP_FAILED_PLUGINS
When set to
.Li 1 ,
behaves the same as passing
.Fl -skip-failed .
.It Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_CLOWN_PROTOCOL
When set to
.Li 1 ,
behaves the same as passing
.Fl -disable-clown-protocol .
.It Ev CLOWN_PLUGIN_META
Path to the plugin metadata directory containing
.Pa plugin-dirs
and
.Pa version-info
files.
Set automatically by the Nix wrapper; not intended for manual use.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa .circus/system-prompt
Replace-mode system prompt file (deepest wins).
.It Pa .circus/system-prompt.d/*.md
Append-mode prompt fragments (shallowest first).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr claude-code 1 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-host 1 ,
.Xr codex 1 ,
.Xr claude-code-hooks 5 ,
.Xr claude-code-settings 5 ,
.Xr clown-json 5 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
