.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt CLOWN-JOB 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm clown-job ,
.Nm clown-job-watch
.Nd background-job lifecycle and agent-wakeup channel
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm clown job start
.Op Fl -target Ar session-key
.Op Fl -label Ar label
.Op Fl -source Ar source
.Nm clown job progress
.Ar job-id
.Op Fl -message Ar message
.Nm clown job done
.Ar job-id
.Fl -state Ar succeeded | failed | cancelled | interrupted
.Op Fl -message Ar message
.Op Fl -result-ref Ar ref
.Nm clown job message
.Fl -target Ar session-key | '*'
.Op Fl -from Ar sender-key
.Op Fl -source Ar source
.Fl -message Ar body
.Op Fl -result-ref Ar ref
.Nm clown job read
.Op Fl -job Ar job-id
.Op Fl -since Ar ts
.Op Fl -type Ar type
.Ar ...
.Op Fl -peek
.Op Fl -json
.Nm clown job spool-path
.Ar job-id
.Op Fl -target Ar session-key
.Nm clown job status
.Ar job-id
.Op Fl -target Ar session-key
.Op Fl -tail Ar n
.Op Fl -json
.Nm clown job-watch
.Nm clown job-mcp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm clown job
subcommands and the
.Nm clown job-watch
monitor implement the clown job-wakeup channel: a facility a clown
plugin uses to defer a long-running task to the background and have the
originating (or an explicitly targeted) agent woken by a push
notification when the task reaches a terminal state.
The full wire and on-disk contract is specified in
.Xr clown-json 5
and in
.Pa docs/rfcs/0009-job-wakeup-channel.md
within the clown source repository.
.Pp
The channel has two layers, separated so that
.Em correctness
.Pq never lose a wakeup
is provided by disk durability while
.Em liveness
.Pq sub-second latency
is provided by a best-effort socket that is always free to drop:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Durable journal
An append-only, on-disk record of each job's lifecycle under
.Pa $XDG_STATE_HOME/clown/jobs/ .
It is the at-least-once source of truth: a wakeup survives the monitor
being down, restarting, or a dropped packet, and is replayed on the
monitor's next start.
.It UDS-datagram nudge
A lossy
.Dq go read the journal now
poke over a Unix-domain datagram socket under
.Pa $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/clown/jobs/ ,
sent after a record is durably written.
Losing it costs latency, never correctness; the receiver always
re-reads the journal rather than acting on datagram contents.
.El
.Pp
The
.Em waking
events \(em those that surface as a notification \(em are the four
.Em terminal
types
.Pq Li succeeded , failed , cancelled , interrupted
plus the non-terminal
.Li message
type (see
.Nm clown job message
below).
The non-terminal
.Li started
and
.Li progress
events are journal-only \(em visible through
.Nm clown job read
but never surfaced as a notification \(em so a chatty job cannot spam the
agent.
.Pp
The push surface is the Claude Code
.Em monitor
mechanism.
.Nm clown
registers the built-in
.Nm clown job-watch
monitor for every applicable session by synthesizing a plugin directory
that declares it and passing that directory with
.Fl -plugin-dir ,
so plugins do not each declare the monitor.
The monitor prints exactly one stdout line per waking event (see
.Sx NOTIFICATION LINE ) ,
which the harness delivers to the agent as a notification.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm clown job start Oo Fl -target Ar session-key Oc Oo Fl -label Ar label Oc Oo Fl -source Ar source Oc
Allocate a job id, create the job's journal file, and append the
.Li started
record
.Pq Li seq No 0 .
Prints the job id as a single line to stdout and exits
.Li 0 .
.Pp
With
.Fl -label
the id is
.Ar sanitized-label Ns Li - Ns Ar 8-hex ;
otherwise it is an
.Ar 8+ hex-digit
id.
With
.Fl -target
the journal is created for the channel derived from
.Ar session-key
rather than the resolved session (see
.Sx SESSION KEY ) ;
this is the external-agent-wakeup case, in which one local clown session
wakes another.
.Fl -source
labels the emitting plugin (e.g.
.Li spinclass ,
.Li moxy )
and is carried verbatim in every record and notification line.
.It Nm clown job progress Ar job-id Oo Fl -message Ar message Oc
Append a
.Li progress
record to the job and optionally send a nudge.
Journal-only: it is recorded and observable but never wakes the agent.
.It Nm clown job done Ar job-id Fl -state Ar state Oo Fl -message Ar message Oc Oo Fl -result-ref Ar ref Oc
Append the job's single terminal record, flush it durably, then send the
nudge.
.Ar state
must be one of
.Li succeeded ,
.Li failed ,
.Li cancelled ,
or
.Li interrupted .
Exits non-zero without appending if the job already has a terminal
record.
.Fl -result-ref
is an opaque pointer the agent may use to fetch full results (e.g. a CLI
invocation hint or a path); it is data surfaced to the agent as text, not
a command the monitor auto-executes.
.It Nm clown job message Fl -target Ar session-key | '*' Oo Fl -from Ar sender-key Oc Oo Fl -source Ar source Oc Fl -message Ar body Oo Fl -result-ref Ar ref Oc
Emit a standalone single-record waking
.Li message
job: a self-contained job whose only record
.Pq Li seq No 0 , job id Li msg- Ns Ar 8-hex
is the non-terminal waking
.Li message
event \(em no
.Li started ,
no terminal record.
Prints the job id and exits
.Li 0 .
The record is durably flushed before any nudge.
.Fl -target
and
.Fl -message
are required; a missing
.Fl -target
or a missing or empty
.Fl -message
is a usage error
.Pq exit Li 2 .
.Fl -from
optionally carries the sender's session key, rendered in the notification
line (see
.Sx NOTIFICATION LINE ) .
.Pp
.Fl -target Ar '*'
addresses the reserved
.Em broadcast
channel: the record is written once and every session's monitor delivers
it.
Broadcast records get
.Em no
nudge \(em the monitor's periodic re-scan (about one second) is the delivery
path.
The broadcast channel has condvar semantics: each reader keeps its own ack
watermark in the broadcast channel directory, and a reader's first attach
initializes that watermark at the current end of the channel \(em like a
waiter on a condition variable, a session only observes broadcasts sent
.Em after
its monitor first attached, and pre-existing broadcasts are never replayed
to a new session.
A directed message
.Pq Fl -target Ar session-key
nudges the target's socket as usual.
.It Nm clown job read Oo Fl -job Ar job-id Oc Oo Fl -since Ar ts Oc Oo Fl -type Ar type Oc Ar ... Oo Fl -peek Oc Oo Fl -json Oc
The pull / observability surface, and the delivery path on hosts where
the monitor is gated off (see
.Sx MACOS FALLBACK ) .
With
.Fl -job
it prints that job's full record stream.
Without
.Fl -job
it scans the channel for waking events, optionally filtered by
.Fl -since
.Pq an exclusive RFC 3339 lower bound on Li ts
and by one or more
.Fl -type
values
.Pq repeatable .
By default each record is printed as a notification line (see
.Sx NOTIFICATION LINE ) ;
with
.Fl -json
each is printed as one JSON object per line.
.Pp
.Sy Current behavior:
the channel-mode read is the cursorless
.Fl -since Ns / Ns Fl -type
filter described above.
The cursor-advancing read defined by the specification \(em return only
waking events newer than the caller's persisted read cursor and advance
that cursor past every event scanned \(em is
.Em not yet implemented .
Consequently
.Fl -peek ,
which is meant to suppress that cursor advance, is accepted for forward
compatibility but is presently a
.Em no-op :
no cursor is advanced regardless.
.It Nm clown job spool-path Ar job-id Oo Fl -target Ar session-key Oc
Print the absolute path of the job's output
.Em spool
\(em a producer-written, append-only side file carrying the job's live
subprocess output, a sibling of the journal at
.Pa <job-id>.out
.Pq RFC-0010 .
The path is printed as a single line and the channel directory is created if
absent, but the spool file itself is
.Em not :
writing it is the producer's append.
.Pp
The spool is the producer's to write and is optional \(em a job without one
is fully conformant and
.Nm clown job status
degrades gracefully.
When the facility is disabled via
.Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_JOB_WAKEUP
this subcommand prints nothing and exits
.Li 0 ,
mirroring the disabled
.Nm clown job start ;
producers tolerate an empty path by skipping the spool.
A malformed
.Ar job-id
is a usage error
.Pq exit Li 2 .
.It Nm clown job status Ar job-id Oo Fl -target Ar session-key Oc Oo Fl -tail Ar n Oc Oo Fl -json Oc
Report a running or finished job's status, derived from its journal and spool
alone: the
.Li state
.Pq the terminal record's type if present, else Li running ,
.Li started ,
.Li ended ,
.Li elapsed_sec ,
.Li last_activity
.Pq the later of the spool's mtime and the newest journal record's timestamp ,
.Li spool_bytes ,
the newest
.Li progress
message, and a bounded
.Li tail
of the spool
.Pq the last Ar n No lines, default 20 .
.Pp
Like
.Nm clown job read
it is a read-only pull, available regardless of
.Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_JOB_WAKEUP .
With
.Fl -json
the status is one JSON object on a single line; otherwise a one-line header is
printed, followed by the tail under a
.Ql ---
separator.
The probe reports journal-derived state only \(em it never infers producer
liveness, so a job whose producer died without a terminal record reports
.Li running
with a stale
.Li last_activity .
When no journal exists for
.Ar job-id
it exits
.Li 1 ;
a malformed
.Ar job-id
is a usage error
.Pq exit Li 2 .
.It Nm clown job-watch Op Fl -once
Run the channel monitor.
It resolves the session key (see
.Sx SESSION KEY ) ,
reads the channel's ack file, replays any unacked waking events from the
journal (oldest first), binds the nudge socket, then blocks, emitting one
notification line per waking event as nudges arrive or a periodic re-scan
finds new terminal records.
A clean interrupt
.Pq Dv SIGINT No or Dv SIGTERM
causes a graceful exit with status
.Li 0 .
The monitor deliberately ignores stdin: monitor hosts spawn it with an
immediately-EOF stdin, so exiting on stdin EOF would kill the monitor at
session start.
With
.Fl -once
it replays unacked waking events and exits
.Li 0
without binding the socket or blocking \(em the deterministic mode used by
the conformance suite, also usable as a pull-style replay.
This subcommand is normally spawned by
.Nm clown
as a registered monitor, not run by hand.
.It Nm clown job-mcp
Run clown's built-in job-platform MCP server (RFC-0011): a stdio JSON-RPC
server exposing the job-wakeup platform as the MCP tools
.Li job_start ,
.Li job_progress ,
.Li job_done ,
.Li job_message ,
.Li job_read ,
.Li job_status ,
and
.Li job_spool_path ,
each equivalent to the matching
.Nm clown job
subcommand.
Like
.Nm clown job-watch
this is normally spawned by
.Nm clown ,
not run by hand:
.Nm clown
synthesizes the
.Li clown-builtin-jobs
plugin declaring it as a
.Xr clown-json 5
stdioServers entry, which
.Xr clown-stdio-bridge 1
wraps to streamable-HTTP and clown's own plugin host manages \(em clown
self-consuming its plugin protocol; see
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7 .
The tools surface to the agent as
.Li plugin:clown-builtin-jobs:jobs .
When the stdio bridge is unavailable (dev builds) or the facility is
disabled, the server is not injected.
.El
.Sh SESSION KEY
A
.Em session key
names the agent session a wakeup is delivered to.
The active session key is resolved in this order:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
.Ev CLOWN_SESSION_ID ,
if set and non-empty.
.It
otherwise
.Ev SPINCLASS_SESSION_ID ,
if set and non-empty (the spinclass
.Ar repo Ns Li / Ns Ar branch
key).
.It
otherwise
.Ev CLAUDE_SESSION_ID ,
if set and non-empty.
.It
otherwise a clown-generated random 128-bit value rendered as 32
lowercase hex digits.
.El
.Pp
.Nm clown
exports the resolved value as
.Ev CLOWN_SESSION_ID
into every plugin MCP server process and into the monitor, so producers
and the monitor agree on the default channel without further
configuration.
It likewise exports
.Ev CLOWN_BIN
so those producers can locate
.Nm clown job
regardless of
.Ev PATH .
The on-disk channel directory and the nudge socket are named by a
filesystem-safe
.Em channel id
derived from the session key \(em the first 16 bytes of its SHA-256
digest as 32 hex digits \(em while the human-readable key is carried
verbatim in each journal record's
.Li session
field.
.Sh NOTIFICATION LINE
Each waking event the monitor emits \(em and each record
.Nm clown job read
prints without
.Fl -json
\(em is a single line with no embedded newline:
.Pp
.Dl [clown-job] <source> <job-id> <type>: <message>
.Pp
When the record carries a
.Li from
(the sender session key on a
.Li message
event), the segment
.Dq Li " from " <from>
is inserted before the colon:
.Pp
.Dl [clown-job] <source> <job-id> <type> from <from>: <message>
.Pp
The trailing
.Dq Li ": " <message>
is omitted when the record has no message.
When
.Li result_ref
is present,
.Dq Li " \(bu " <result_ref>
is appended.
Any newline in
.Li message
or
.Li result_ref
is flattened to a space so the one-line-per-event contract holds.
.Pp
The channel guarantees each waking event is surfaced at least once: a
monitor crash between printing a line and persisting its ack re-emits
that event on the next monitor start.
Consumers MUST treat wakeups as idempotent, deduplicating on
.Pq Li job , Li type .
.Sh MACOS FALLBACK
Claude Code arms plugin monitors behind a feature flag that currently
resolves false on macOS, so on those hosts the
.Nm clown job-watch
monitor is a silent no-op.
The journal is unaffected, so
.Nm clown job read
is the documented pull fallback for observing terminal events on those
hosts \(em the same posture spinclass relies on for cross-session chat.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_JOB_WAKEUP
When set to
.Li 1 ,
the whole facility is disabled.
.Nm clown job-watch
exits
.Li 0
immediately without binding a socket, and the emit subcommands
.Pq Cm start , progress , done , message
behave as no-ops that still exit
.Li 0 ,
so producers need no conditional logic.
.Nm clown job spool-path
likewise prints nothing and exits
.Li 0 .
.Nm clown job read
and
.Nm clown job status
still work, since they are pulls rather than emits.
.It Ev CLOWN_SESSION_ID
The highest-priority session-key source; also the variable clown exports
the resolved key into (see
.Sx SESSION KEY ) .
.It Ev SPINCLASS_SESSION_ID
The spinclass
.Ar repo Ns Li / Ns Ar branch
session key, consulted when
.Ev CLOWN_SESSION_ID
is unset.
.It Ev CLAUDE_SESSION_ID
Consulted when neither
.Ev CLOWN_SESSION_ID
nor
.Ev SPINCLASS_SESSION_ID
is set.
.It Ev CLOWN_BIN
Absolute path to the clown binary, exported by
.Nm clown
into every plugin MCP server process so plugin producers can locate
.Nm clown job
regardless of
.Ev PATH .
Plugin producers should invoke it as
.Li ${CLOWN_BIN:-clown} .
.It Ev XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for the durable journal
.Pq Pa clown/jobs/<channel-id>/ .
Defaults to
.Pa $HOME/.local/state
when unset.
.It Ev XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Base directory for the nudge socket
.Pq Pa clown/jobs/<channel-id>.sock .
When unset, the socket falls back to a per-user directory under
.Ev TMPDIR
.Pq default Pa /tmp .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa $XDG_STATE_HOME/clown/jobs/<channel-id>/<job-id>.jsonl
Per-job durable journal, one JSON record per line.
.It Pa $XDG_STATE_HOME/clown/jobs/<channel-id>/<job-id>.out
Per-job output spool: producer-written, append-only, best-effort live
subprocess output surfaced by
.Nm clown job status .
Optional; reaped with its journal.
.It Pa $XDG_STATE_HOME/clown/jobs/<channel-id>/.ack.json
Per-channel monitor ack state.
.It Pa $XDG_STATE_HOME/clown/jobs/<channel-id>/.ack-<reader-channel-id>.json
Per-reader ack state on the broadcast channel, one file per reader
(growth/GC is tracked as clown issue #113).
.It Pa $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/clown/jobs/<channel-id>.sock
Per-channel nudge datagram socket.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li 0
The subcommand succeeded, or the facility was disabled via
.Ev CLOWN_DISABLE_JOB_WAKEUP .
.Nm clown job-watch
also exits
.Li 0
on a clean interrupt
.Pq Dv SIGINT No or Dv SIGTERM .
.It Li 1
A runtime failure (e.g. a journal write error,
.Nm clown job done
on a job that already has a terminal record, or
.Nm clown job status
for a job with no journal).
.It Li 2
A usage error: missing or unknown subcommand, a missing required
.Ar job-id ,
a malformed
.Ar job-id ,
or an invalid flag.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Background a long task and wake the originating session on completion:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
job=$(clown job start --source spinclass --label merge)
# ... run the long pre-merge hook ...
clown job done "$job" --state succeeded \e
  --message "merge landed on master" \e
  --result-ref "spinclass session-job-status"
.Ed
.Pp
The idle agent receives one notification:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[clown-job] spinclass merge-9f3c1a2b succeeded: merge landed on master \(bu spinclass session-job-status
.Ed
.Pp
Emit journal-only progress (never wakes), then a terminal event:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
job=$(clown job start --source moxy --label build)
clown job progress "$job" --message "evaluating flake"
clown job done "$job" --state succeeded --message "nix build ok"
.Ed
.Pp
Wake a different local clown session:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
clown job start --target clown/other-branch --source ci --label deploy
.Ed
.Pp
Send a directed message to another session, and a broadcast to all
sessions (the broadcast is only seen by monitors already attached):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
clown job message --target clown/other-branch \e
  --from clown/this-branch --source spinclass --message "merge queue is free"
clown job message --target '*' \e
  --from clown/this-branch --source spinclass --message "rebasing master, hold pushes"
.Ed
.Pp
The directed recipient is woken with:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[clown-job] spinclass msg-9f3c1a2b message from clown/this-branch: merge queue is free
.Ed
.Pp
Observe a job's full record stream on demand (pull; never wakes):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
clown job read --job build-3f2ab1c9 --json
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-json 5 ,
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
.Pp
The normative wire and on-disk contract \(em journal record schema, nudge
datagram format, socket and path conventions, session-key resolution, and
the at-least-once replay semantics \(em is specified in
.Pa docs/rfcs/0009-job-wakeup-channel.md ,
with the feature-level treatment in
.Pa docs/features/0013-job-wakeup-channel.md ,
both within the clown source repository.
The output spool and status probe
.Pq Nm clown job spool-path , Nm clown job status
are specified in
.Pa docs/rfcs/0010-job-output-spool-and-status.md .
The MCP tool surface
.Pq Nm clown job-mcp
is specified in
.Pa docs/rfcs/0011-job-platform-mcp-tools.md .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An amarbel, LLC
.Lk https://github.com/amarbel-llc/clown
