.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 OpenAI
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt CODEX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm codex
.Nd terminal-based AI coding agent from OpenAI
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl m Ar model
.Op Fl C Ar dir
.Op Fl a Ar policy
.Op Fl s Ar mode
.Op Fl p Ar profile
.Op Fl c Ar key=value
.Op Fl i Ar path
.Op Fl Fl full-auto
.Op Fl Fl oss
.Op Ar prompt
.Nm
.Cm exec
.Op Fl Fl json | Fl Fl experimental-json
.Op Fl o
.Op Fl Fl output-schema Ar schema
.Op Fl Fl color Ar when
.Op Fl Fl ephemeral
.Op Fl Fl skip-git-repo-check
.Op Ar prompt | Fl
.Nm
.Cm login
.Op Fl Fl device-auth | Fl Fl with-api-key
.Nm
.Cm login status
.Nm
.Cm logout
.Nm
.Cm resume
.Op Ar session_id | Fl Fl last
.Op Fl Fl all
.Nm
.Cm fork
.Op Ar session_id | Fl Fl last
.Op Fl Fl all
.Nm
.Cm app
.Op Ar path
.Op Fl Fl download-url Ar url
.Nm
.Cm app-server
.Fl Fl listen Ar transport
.Op Ar auth-flags
.Nm
.Cm apply
.Ar task_id
.Nm
.Cm cloud
.Ar query
.Fl Fl env Ar env_id
.Op Fl Fl attempts Ar 1-4
.Nm
.Cm cloud list
.Op Fl Fl env Ar env_id
.Op Fl Fl json
.Op Fl Fl limit Ar n
.Op Fl Fl cursor Ar str
.Nm
.Cm completion
.Ar bash | zsh | fish | power-shell | elvish
.Nm
.Cm mcp
.Cm add | get | list | remove | login | logout
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm mcp-server
.Nm
.Cm features
.Cm list | enable | disable
.Op Ar feature
.Nm
.Cm execpolicy
.Ar command ...
.Fl Fl rules Ar path
.Op Fl Fl pretty
.Nm
.Cm sandbox
.Ar command ...
.Op Fl Fl full-auto
.Op Fl c Ar key=value
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a terminal-based coding agent built by OpenAI in Rust.
It provides an interactive TUI for conversational coding assistance,
a non-interactive
.Cm exec
mode for CI pipelines and scripting,
MCP server integration,
multi-agent orchestration,
lifecycle hooks,
and sandboxed command execution.
.Pp
.Nm
connects to OpenAI models by default but also supports local OSS models
via Ollama or LM Studio using the
.Fl Fl oss
flag.
Custom model providers can be configured for any OpenAI-compatible API endpoint.
.Pp
In interactive mode,
.Nm
presents a full-screen TUI where users can converse with the model,
approve or reject tool calls,
and observe file modifications in real time.
The
.Cm exec
subcommand runs a single prompt to completion without the TUI,
suitable for shell scripts and CI workflows.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm exec , Cm e
Run a prompt non-interactively and exit.
Reads from
.Ar prompt
argument or standard input when
.Fl
is specified.
Output is written to stdout.
See
.Sx EXEC OPTIONS
for additional flags.
.It Cm login
Authenticate with OpenAI.
By default uses ChatGPT OAuth device flow.
Use
.Fl Fl with-api-key
to authenticate with an
.Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
instead.
.It Cm login status
Print current authentication state and exit.
.It Cm logout
Remove stored credentials from
.Pa ~/.codex/auth.json .
.It Cm resume Op Ar session_id | Fl Fl last
Resume a previous session.
If no
.Ar session_id
is given and
.Fl Fl last
is specified,
resumes the most recent session.
Pass
.Fl Fl all
to include all messages rather than a summary.
.It Cm fork Op Ar session_id | Fl Fl last
Fork a previous session into a new session, preserving its context.
Accepts the same arguments as
.Cm resume .
.It Cm app Op Ar path
Run or install a Codex App.
When
.Ar path
is provided, runs the app at that location.
Use
.Fl Fl download-url Ar url
to fetch and install an app from a remote URL.
.It Cm app-server Fl Fl listen Ar transport
Start Codex as a headless server for multi-agent or remote-control scenarios.
The
.Ar transport
argument specifies the listening address.
See
.Sx APP-SERVER OPTIONS .
.It Cm apply Ar task_id
Apply the results of a cloud task to the local working tree.
.It Cm cloud Ar query Fl Fl env Ar env_id
Submit a task to Codex Cloud for remote execution.
The
.Fl Fl env
flag specifies the cloud environment.
Use
.Fl Fl attempts
to set retry count
.Pq 1\(en4 .
.It Cm cloud list
List cloud tasks.
Supports
.Fl Fl json
for machine-readable output and
.Fl Fl limit Ns / Ns Fl Fl cursor
for pagination.
.It Cm completion Ar shell
Generate shell completion scripts for
.Ar bash ,
.Ar zsh ,
.Ar fish ,
.Ar power-shell ,
or
.Ar elvish .
.It Cm mcp Cm add
Register an MCP server.
Use
.Fl Fl
followed by the server command for stdio transport,
or
.Fl Fl url
for HTTP transport.
See
.Sx MCP OPTIONS .
.It Cm mcp Cm get Ar id
Show configuration for a registered MCP server.
.It Cm mcp Cm list
List all registered MCP servers.
.It Cm mcp Cm remove Ar id
Unregister an MCP server.
.It Cm mcp Cm login Ar id
Authenticate with an MCP server that requires OAuth.
.It Cm mcp Cm logout Ar id
Remove stored credentials for an MCP server.
.It Cm mcp-server
Run
.Nm
itself as an MCP server, exposing its capabilities to other agents.
.It Cm features Cm list
List all feature flags and their current state.
.It Cm features Cm enable Ar feature
Enable a feature flag.
.It Cm features Cm disable Ar feature
Disable a feature flag.
.It Cm execpolicy Ar command ... Fl Fl rules Ar path
Evaluate a command against an exec-policy rules file.
Prints the policy decision.
Use
.Fl Fl pretty
for human-readable output.
.It Cm sandbox Ar command ...
Run a command inside the Codex sandbox.
Useful for testing sandbox behavior.
Use
.Fl Fl full-auto
to apply full-auto sandbox settings.
Additional config overrides may be passed with
.Fl c Ar key=value .
.El
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl m Ar model , Fl Fl model Ar model
Model to use for completions.
Defaults to the
.Va model
key in configuration.
Examples:
.Ql o4-mini ,
.Ql gpt-4.1 ,
.Ql codex-mini-latest .
.It Fl C Ar dir , Fl Fl cd Ar dir
Change the working directory before starting.
.It Fl a Ar policy , Fl Fl ask-for-approval Ar policy
Set the approval policy for tool calls.
.Ar policy
is one of:
.Bl -tag -width "on-request" -compact
.It Cm untrusted
Approve every tool call interactively.
.It Cm on-request
Approve only when the model requests it.
.It Cm never
Approve nothing; the model runs autonomously within sandbox constraints.
.El
.It Fl s Ar mode , Fl Fl sandbox Ar mode
Set the sandbox execution mode.
.Ar mode
is one of:
.Bl -tag -width "workspace-write" -compact
.It Cm read-only
No filesystem writes allowed.
.It Cm workspace-write
Writes allowed only within the project workspace.
.It Cm danger-full-access
No sandbox restrictions.
Use with extreme caution.
.El
.It Fl c Ar key=value , Fl Fl config Ar key=value
Override a configuration key for this invocation.
May be specified multiple times.
Dotted keys are supported
.Pq e.g., Fl c Va sandbox_mode=read-only .
.It Fl p Ar profile , Fl Fl profile Ar profile
Activate a named configuration profile.
Profiles are defined in
.Pa config.toml
under
.Va [profiles.name] .
.It Fl Fl enable Ar feature
Enable a feature flag for this session.
.It Fl Fl disable Ar feature
Disable a feature flag for this session.
.It Fl Fl add-dir Ar path
Add an additional directory to the agent's context.
May be specified multiple times.
.It Fl i Ar path , Fl Fl image Ar path
Attach an image to the initial prompt.
Supports PNG, JPEG, GIF, and WebP.
May be specified multiple times.
.It Fl Fl full-auto
Shorthand for
.Fl a Cm never
.Fl s Cm workspace-write .
The agent runs without interactive approval, writing only within the workspace.
.It Fl Fl oss
Use a local OSS model via Ollama or LM Studio.
Configurable via the
.Va oss_provider
key.
.It Fl Fl search
Enable web search tool for the session.
.It Fl Fl no-alt-screen
Disable the alternate screen buffer in the TUI.
.It Fl Fl dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox , Fl Fl yolo
Disable all approval checks and sandbox restrictions.
.Bf -emphasis
This is dangerous and should never be used on untrusted input.
.Ef
.It Fl Fl remote Ar ws://host:port
Connect to a remote Codex app-server instead of running locally.
.It Fl Fl remote-auth-token-env Ar var
Environment variable containing the authentication token for
.Fl Fl remote
connections.
.El
.Sh EXEC OPTIONS
These options apply only to the
.Cm exec
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl json , Fl Fl experimental-json
Emit structured JSON output instead of plain text.
.It Fl o , Fl Fl output-last-message
Print only the final assistant message to stdout.
.It Fl Fl output-schema Ar schema
Provide a JSON Schema that the model's output must conform to.
.It Fl Fl color Ar when
Control color output.
.Ar when
is one of
.Cm always ,
.Cm never ,
or
.Cm auto
.Pq default .
.It Fl Fl ephemeral
Do not persist the session to history.
.It Fl Fl skip-git-repo-check
Skip the check that verifies the working directory is inside a git repository.
.It Fl (stdin)
When
.Fl
is the last argument, the prompt is read from standard input.
Useful for piping content:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
echo "Explain this code" | codex exec -
.Ed
.El
.Sh LOGIN OPTIONS
These options apply only to the
.Cm login
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl device-auth
Use the OAuth device authorization flow.
A browser window opens for the user to approve.
.It Fl Fl with-api-key
Authenticate using an API key from the
.Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
environment variable or interactive prompt.
.El
.Sh MCP OPTIONS
These options apply to the
.Cm mcp add
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl Ar command ...
For stdio-based MCP servers, specify the server command after a
.Ql --
separator:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex mcp add my-server -- /path/to/server --flag
.Ed
.It Fl Fl url Ar url
Register an HTTP-based MCP server at the given URL.
.It Fl Fl bearer-token-env-var Ar var
Name of the environment variable containing a bearer token
for authenticating with the MCP server.
.It Fl Fl env Ar KEY=VALUE
Set an environment variable in the MCP server's process.
May be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh APP-SERVER OPTIONS
These options apply to the
.Cm app-server
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl listen Ar transport
Listening transport.
.Ar transport
is one of:
.Bl -tag -width "ws://IP:PORT" -compact
.It Pa stdio://
Communicate over stdin/stdout.
.It Pa ws://IP:PORT
Listen on a WebSocket endpoint.
.El
.It Fl Fl ws-auth Ar method
Authentication method for WebSocket connections.
.It Fl Fl ws-audience Ar audience
Expected audience claim for JWT validation.
.It Fl Fl ws-issuer Ar issuer
Expected issuer claim for JWT validation.
.It Fl Fl ws-max-clock-skew-seconds Ar n
Maximum allowed clock skew in seconds for JWT validation.
.It Fl Fl ws-shared-secret-file Ar path
Path to a file containing the shared secret for HMAC JWT validation.
.It Fl Fl ws-token-file Ar path
Path to a file containing a pre-shared token for authentication.
.El
.Sh CLOUD OPTIONS
These options apply to the
.Cm cloud
subcommand.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl env Ar env_id
Codex Cloud environment identifier.
Required for
.Cm cloud
task submission.
.It Fl Fl attempts Ar n
Number of attempts for the cloud task.
Valid range is 1 to 4.
Default is 1.
.El
.Sh INSTALLATION
.Nm
can be installed via several methods:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It npm
.Bd -literal -offset indent
npm install -g @openai/codex
.Ed
.It Homebrew
.Bd -literal -offset indent
brew install openai-codex
.Ed
.It Direct binary download
Pre-built binaries for Linux and macOS are published as GitHub releases.
Download the appropriate archive for your platform and place the binary
on your
.Ev PATH .
.El
.Sh AUTHENTICATION
.Nm
supports three authentication methods:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Sy ChatGPT OAuth
.Pq default .
Run
.Cm codex login
to authenticate via browser-based OAuth device flow.
Credentials are stored in
.Pa ~/.codex/auth.json .
.It
.Sy API key .
Set the
.Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
environment variable or use
.Cm codex login --with-api-key .
.It
.Sy Custom provider auth .
Configure a custom model provider with an
.Va auth.command
that returns credentials on stdout.
The command is invoked before each API request.
.El
.Sh MODELS
The model is selected via the
.Va model
configuration key or the
.Fl m
flag.
Default models include
.Ql o4-mini
and
.Ql codex-mini-latest .
.Pp
For local OSS models, use
.Fl Fl oss
which routes requests through Ollama or LM Studio
depending on the
.Va oss_provider
setting.
.Pp
Custom model providers are configured in
.Pa config.toml
under
.Va [model_providers.id]
with a
.Va base_url ,
.Va env_key ,
and optional
.Va wire_api
and
.Va auth.command .
.Sh APPROVAL POLICY
The approval policy controls whether tool calls require interactive user consent.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm untrusted
Every tool invocation requires explicit approval.
Safest mode for untrusted prompts.
.It Cm on-request
The model decides when to ask for approval.
Tool calls annotated as safe by the model run without prompting.
.It Cm never
No approval prompts.
The agent runs autonomously.
Should only be used with appropriate sandbox settings.
.El
.Pp
The
.Va approvals_reviewer
config key can be set to
.Cm guardian_subagent
to delegate approval decisions to a secondary model instead of the user.
.Sh SANDBOX
.Nm
enforces sandboxed execution of shell commands to limit the blast radius
of autonomous operation.
.Pp
On macOS, the sandbox uses
.Xr sandbox-exec 1
.Pq Seatbelt .
On Linux, it uses Landlock LSM and seccomp-bpf.
.Pp
Three modes are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm read-only
No filesystem writes.
Network access is blocked.
.It Cm workspace-write
Writes are allowed within the project workspace and configured
.Va writable_roots .
Network access is configurable via
.Va sandbox_workspace_write.network_access .
.It Cm danger-full-access
No sandbox restrictions.
Equivalent to running commands directly in the host shell.
.El
.Sh MULTI-AGENT
.Nm
supports multi-agent orchestration where a primary agent can spawn
sub-agents to work on tasks in parallel.
.Pp
Configuration keys:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va max_threads
Maximum number of concurrent sub-agent threads.
.It Va max_depth
Maximum nesting depth for sub-agent spawning.
.El
.Pp
Per-agent configuration can be specified via
.Va config_file ,
.Va description ,
and
.Va nickname_candidates
keys.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa /etc/codex/config.toml
System-wide configuration.
Lowest precedence.
.It Pa ~/.codex/config.toml
User configuration.
.It Pa .codex/config.toml
Project-level configuration.
Highest file-based precedence
.Pq CLI flags override all .
.It Pa ~/.codex/auth.json
Stored authentication credentials.
.It Pa ~/.codex/history.jsonl
Session history in JSON Lines format.
.It Pa ~/.codex/hooks.json
User-level lifecycle hooks.
.It Pa .codex/hooks.json
Project-level lifecycle hooks.
.It Pa AGENTS.md
Agent instructions file, loaded automatically when present in the
project root.
Analogous to a system prompt for the coding agent.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev CODEX_HOME
Override the configuration and state directory.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.codex .
.It Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI authentication.
.It Ev CODEX_CA_CERTIFICATE
Path to a PEM-encoded CA certificate bundle for TLS verification.
.It Ev CODEX_SQLITE_HOME
Directory for the SQLite state database.
.It Ev SSL_CERT_FILE
Fallback CA certificate bundle path when
.Ev CODEX_CA_CERTIFICATE
is not set.
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr codex-env 7
for the complete list of environment variables and the shell environment
policy system.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start an interactive session:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex "Fix the failing tests in src/parser.rs"
.Ed
.Pp
Run non-interactively in CI:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex exec --full-auto "Add error handling to all unwrap() calls"
.Ed
.Pp
Pipe a diff for review:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
git diff HEAD~1 | codex exec -o "Review this diff for bugs" -
.Ed
.Pp
Use a local model:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex --oss -m deepseek-coder-v2 "Refactor this module"
.Ed
.Pp
Register an MCP server:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex mcp add my-tools -- /usr/local/bin/my-mcp-server
codex mcp add remote-tools --url https://mcp.example.com/sse
.Ed
.Pp
Generate shell completions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex completion fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/codex.fish
.Ed
.Pp
Submit a cloud task:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
codex cloud "Migrate database schema" --env prod-env-123
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr codex-config 5 ,
.Xr codex-env 7
.Sh AUTHORS
OpenAI
.Aq Mt https://openai.com
