.\" Copyright (c) 2026 amarbel, LLC
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd @MDOCDATE@
.Dt RINGMASTER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ringmaster
.Nd llama-server control-plane daemon and background-job control
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm daemon
.Op Fl -socket Ar path
.Nm
.Cm ls
.Op Fl -target Ar key
.Op Fl -all
.Op Fl -json
.Nm
.Cm status Ar job-id
.Op Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id
.Op Fl -tail Ar n
.Op Fl -json
.Nm
.Cm tail Ar job-id
.Op Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl n Ar lines
.Nm
.Cm cancel Ar job-id
.Op Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id
.Op Fl -message Ar text
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a long-lived per-user daemon that spawns and supervises
.Xr llama-server 1
processes on behalf of clients such as
.Xr circus 1
and
.Xr clown 1 .
Each
.Xr llama-server 1
child is identified by an alias and listed in an in-memory registry;
ringmaster reaps the child when it exits, with or without a
.Cm StopInstance
request.
.Pp
Clients talk to
.Nm
over a Unix domain socket using newline-delimited JSON-RPC 2.0.
See
.Xr ringmaster 7
for the architecture and
.Xr clown-plugin-protocol 7
for unrelated background on the clown plugin protocol.
.Pp
.Nm
additionally serves as the operator-facing control surface for clown's
background jobs: the
.Cm ls , status , tail ,
and
.Cm cancel
subcommands list, inspect, follow, and cancel the long-running jobs that
agents drive through the
.Xr clown-job 1
producer surface
.Pq the job-wakeup channel and output spool .
These subcommands need no running daemon; they read and append to the
on-disk job journal directly.
.Pp
A single job is addressed two ways.
.Fl -target
takes a session key the operator holds and hashes it to a channel
.Pq resolved like Xr clown-job 1 .
.Fl -channel
takes a raw channel id directly \(em the value
.Cm ls Fl -all
prints \(em so an operator can act on a job in a session whose key it does
not hold; the channel id is a one-way hash of the session key, so
.Fl -target
cannot reach it.
The two are mutually exclusive, and a
.Fl -channel
that is not lowercase hex is rejected as a usage error.
.Pp
.Nm
is intended to run under
.Xr launchd 8
on macOS and
.Xr systemd.user 5
on Linux; the
.Sx programs.ringmaster
home-manager module configures the appropriate service unit on each
platform.
Single-instance only: one
.Nm
daemon per user manages every
.Xr llama-server 1
child.
.Sh SUBCOMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm daemon Op Fl -socket Ar path
Run the control-plane daemon.
Listens on the path resolved from
.Fl -socket
when present, the
.Ev RINGMASTER_SOCKET
environment variable when set, or
.Pa $HOME/.local/state/circus/control.sock
otherwise.
Accepts connections until SIGTERM/SIGINT, at which point in-flight
RPCs drain and the listener closes.
.It Cm ls Oo Fl -target Ar key Oc Oo Fl -all Oc Oo Fl -json Oc
List background jobs as a table of job id, source, state, elapsed time,
and last activity.
By default lists the jobs in the current session's channel
.Pq resolved like Xr clown-job 1 ;
.Fl -target
selects another session key, and
.Fl -all
spans every channel on the host, prefixing each row with its full channel
id \(em the exact value the action subcommands accept via
.Fl -channel .
.Fl -json
emits a JSON array instead.
.It Cm status Ar job-id Oo Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id Oc Oo Fl -tail Ar n Oc Oo Fl -json Oc
Print one job's full status
.Pq state, source, elapsed, last activity
followed by the last
.Ar n
.Pq default 20
lines of its output spool.
Mirrors
.Xr clown-job 1
.Cm status .
A malformed job id or channel id exits 2; a missing job exits 1.
.It Cm tail Ar job-id Oo Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id Oc Oo Fl f Oc Oo Fl n Ar lines Oc
Print the last
.Ar lines
.Pq default 20
lines of a job's output spool.
With
.Fl f ,
follow the spool, streaming appended output until the job reaches a
terminal state or the operator interrupts.
.It Cm cancel Ar job-id Oo Fl -target Ar key | Fl -channel Ar id Oc Oo Fl -message Ar text Oc
Cooperatively cancel a job by writing its terminal
.Sq cancelled
record.
This wakes the originating session's monitor and signals the owning
producer to stop; see
.Sx CAVEATS .
A missing job, or one that is already terminal, exits 1.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev RINGMASTER_SOCKET
Override the control socket path.
Both
.Nm
itself and its clients
.Pq Xr circus 1 , Xr clown 1
read this variable, so setting it consistently in the user's
environment is sufficient.
.It Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
Resolves the canonical log directory.
.Nm
itself does not write a log file; the home-manager service units
route stderr to systemd journal (Linux) or to
.Pa $XDG_LOG_HOME/ringmaster.log
.Pq Pa ~/.local/log/ringmaster.log
when the variable is unset (macOS).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "~/.local/state/circus/control.sock"
.It Pa ~/.local/state/circus/control.sock
Default control socket path.
.It Pa ~/.local/log/ringmaster.log
Default log file on macOS when
.Ev XDG_LOG_HOME
is unset.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models
Directory scanned for downloadable GGUF files by the
.Cm ListAvailableModels
RPC.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/clown/jobs
Per-channel background-job journals
.Pq Pa <channel>/<job-id>.jsonl
and output spools
.Pq Pa <channel>/<job-id>.out
read by
.Cm ls , status ,
and
.Cm tail
and appended to by
.Cm cancel .
Honors
.Ev XDG_STATE_HOME .
.El
.Sh RPC SURFACE
.Nm
implements seven JSON-RPC 2.0 methods:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm StartInstance Ar alias Ar model Op Ar bind Op Ar args
Spawn a new
.Xr llama-server 1
child with the given
.Fl -alias .
The
.Fl -model
argument resolves to
.Pa ~/.local/share/circus/models/<model>.gguf
when not absolute.
.Fl -bind
defaults to
.Sq 127.0.0.1 ;
.Fl -args
is passed through to llama-server.
The call blocks until
.Pa /health
returns 200 (60-second timeout).
.It Cm StopInstance Ar alias
Send SIGTERM to the child's process group, wait up to five seconds,
then SIGKILL if it didn't exit.
Removes the entry from the registry.
.It Cm StopAll
Best-effort: snapshot the registry, call
.Cm StopInstance
for each alias.
Returns the list of aliases that were stopped.
.It Cm ListInstances
Return every alias known to the registry along with its bind/port/PID
and start time.
.It Cm GetInstance Ar alias
Same shape as
.Cm ListInstances
but for a single alias.
Returns
.Sy -32001
when the alias is not registered.
.It Cm ListAvailableModels
Scan the on-disk models directory and return each
.Pa *.gguf
file's name, absolute path, and size.
.It Cm DownloadModel Ar name
Fetch a model from the embedded registry, verify its SHA-256, and
move it atomically into the models directory.
Synchronous (no progress events on the wire) — use
.Xr circus 1
.Cm download
for the bubbletea progress UI.
.El
.Sh SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width SIGINT
.It Dv SIGTERM
Drain in-flight RPCs and exit cleanly.
Children are NOT killed; they continue running and will be re-adopted
by the next
.Nm
process if it restarts before they exit.
.It Dv SIGINT
Same as
.Dv SIGTERM .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr circus 1 ,
.Xr clown 1 ,
.Xr clown-job 1 ,
.Xr llama-server 1 ,
.Xr ringmaster 7 ,
.Xr ringmaster-testing 7
.Sh CAVEATS
.Nm
single-Wait contract: only one goroutine inside the daemon ever calls
.Xr exec.Cmd.Wait 3
for each child.
Both the
.Cm StopInstance
path and the unexpected-exit reaper read the same
.Sq exited
channel rather than reaping independently.
If you embed
.Nm Ap s
launcher in your own code, preserve this invariant.
.Pp
.Cm cancel
is cooperative, not forceful.
Background jobs are not spawned by
.Nm
and the job journal deliberately records no worker PID
.Pq a PID is meaningless across the sessions and hosts a channel may span ,
so
.Cm cancel
writes the terminal
.Sq cancelled
record rather than sending a signal to an operating-system process.
The owning producer is responsible for observing the cancellation and
tearing down its own process tree.
A producer that has hard-crashed without writing a terminal record cannot
be reaped by
.Cm cancel ;
its journal is garbage-collected after the retention window.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An "amarbel, LLC"
